Well, it is wonderful to be back in Colorado. It is wonderful to be back in Denver. I want to
thank Chief White for that introduction. You’ve got some outstanding elected officials who are
here today, and I want to acknowledge them. First of all, a wonderful governor -- John
Hickenlooper is here. He’s here somewhere. I know, because I just talked to him. There he
is. Next to him an outstanding lieutenant governor, Joe Garcia. One of the finest young
senators in the country -- Michael Bennet is here. Terrific members of the House of
Representatives -- Ed Perlmutter -- and Dianna Degette. And your own mayor, Michael
Hancock, is here.
I want to say thank you to the Denver Police for having me here, and more importantly, for
the outstanding work that all of you do each and every day to serve your communities and
protect your citizens.
Before I came out here, I had a chance to sit down with some local law enforcement, Attorney
General Holder, and some of the leaders I just mentioned, the wonderful mayor of Aurora
who’s here, sportsmen, parents, loved ones of the victims of the shootings in Columbine and
Aurora. And we talked about what we can do to protect more of our citizens from gun
violence.And from the beginning of this effort, we’ve wanted law enforcement front and center in
shaping this discussion and the reforms that emerge from it -- because law enforcement lives
this every day. Law enforcement are the first to see the terrible consequences of any kind of
violence, certainly gun violence -- lives lost, families broken, communities that are changed
forever. They’re very often in the line of fire. The law enforcement knows what works and
what doesn’t, and so we wanted that experience and that advice.
And it was also important for us to hear from mayors like Steve Hogan, because he’s been on
the front lines having to deal with these issues under incredibly sad circumstances. And I’ve
come to Denver today in particular because Colorado is proving a model of what’s possible.
It’s now been just over 100 days since the murder of 20 innocent children and six brave
educators in Newtown, Connecticut -- an event that shocked this country and I think
galvanized parents all across the country to say, we’ve got to do something more to protect
our kids. But consider this: Over those 100 days or so, more than 100 times as many
Americans have fallen victim to gun violence. More than 2,000 of our fellow citizens, struck
down, often because they were just going about their daily round. They weren’t doing
anything special. Just doing what folks do every day -- shopping, going to school. Every day
that we wait to do something about it, even more of our fellow citizens are stolen from our
lives by a bullet from a gun.
Now, the good news is Colorado has already chosen to do something about it. Look, this is a
state that has suffered the tragedy of two of the worst mass shootings in our history -- 14
years ago this month in Columbine, and just last year in Aurora. But this is also a state that
treasures its Second Amendment rights -- the state of proud hunters and sportsmen. And, by
the way, the Governor wanted me to remind everybody that there is outstanding elk hunting
here in Colorado. There’s a strong tradition of gun ownership that’s handed down from
generation to generation, and it’s part of the fabric of people’s lives. And they treat gun
ownership with reverence and respect.
And so I’m here because I believe there doesn't have to be a conflict in reconciling these
realities. There doesn’t have to be a conflict between protecting our citizens and protecting
our Second Amendment rights. I’ve got stacks of letters in my office from proud gun owners,
whether they’re for sport, or protection, or collection, who tell me how deeply they cherish
their rights, don’t want them infringed upon, but they still want us to do something to stop the
epidemic of gun violence. And I appreciate every one of those letters. And I’ve learned from
them.
And I think that Colorado has shown that practical progress is possible thanks to the
leadership of Governor Hickenlooper and some of the state legislators who are here today.
When I was talking to Steve, he mentioned that Aurora is very much a purple city. It’s got a
majority Republican city council; a majority of the state legislators are Democrat. But they came together understanding that out of this tragedy there had to be something that
made sense. And so we’ve seen enacted tougher background checks that won’t infringe on
the rights of responsible gun owners, but will help keep guns out of the hands of dangerous
people.
Now, in January, just a few weeks after Newtown, I put forward a series of common-sense
proposals along the same lines as what’s passed here in Colorado, to reduce gun violence and
keep our kids safe. In my State of the Union address, I urged Congress to give these
proposals a vote. And, by the way, before we even asked for a vote, I had already signed
numerous executive orders doing what we could administratively to make sure that guns don't
fall into the hands of the wrong people.
But what I said then is still true: If we're really going to tackle this problem seriously, then
we've got to get Congress to take the next step. And as soon as next week, they will be
voting. As soon as next week, every senator will get to vote on whether or not we should
require background checks for anyone who wants to purchase a gun.
Now, some say, well, we already have background checks. And they're right. Over the past
20 years, those background checks have kept more than 2 million dangerous people from
buying a gun. But the loopholes that currently exist in the law have allowed way too many
criminals and folks who shouldn’t be getting guns -- it has allowed them to avoid background
checks entirely. That makes it harder for law enforcement to do its job. It's not safe. It's not
smart. And, by the way, it's not fair to responsible gun owners who are playing by the rules.
Now, understand, nobody is talking about creating an entirely new system. We are simply
talking about plugging holes, sealing a porous system that isn't working as well as it should.
If you want to buy a gun, whether it's from a licensed dealer or a private seller, you should at
least have to pass a background check to show you're not a criminal or someone legally
prohibited from buying on. And that’s just common sense.
During our roundtable discussion with Governor Hickenlooper, who I know was in the midst of
this passionate debate about the legislation here in Colorado, and some people said, well,
background checks aren't going to stop everybody. And the Governor was the first one to
acknowledge, yes, they won't stop everybody, but as he pointed out, statistically, there are a
whole bunch of folks who have been stopped.
As a consequence of background checks, law enforcement has been able to stop people who
have been convicted of murder from getting a gun, people who are under restraining orders
for having committed violent domestic abuse from getting a gun. In a couple of cases the
governor mentioned to me, law enforcement has actually been able to arrest people who
came to pick up their gun -- because they were criminals, wanted.So this does work. And, by the way, if you’re selling a gun, wouldn’t you want to know who
you’re selling it to? Wouldn’t you want to know? Wouldn’t you want in your conscience to
know that the person you’re selling to isn’t going to commit a crime?
So these enhanced background checks won’t stop all gun crimes, but they will certainly help
prevent some. This is common sense. And, by the way, most gun owners -- more than 80
percent -- agree this makes sense. More than 70 percent of NRA members agree. Ninety
percent of the American people agree. So there’s no reason we can’t do this unless politics is
getting in the way. There’s no reason we can’t do this.
As soon as next week, every senator will get a chance to vote on a proposal to help
strengthen school safety and help people struggling with mental health problems get the
treatment that they need.
As soon as next week, every senator will get to vote on whether or not we should crack down
on folks who buy guns as part of a scheme to arm criminals. That would keep more guns off
the streets and out of the hands of people who are intent on doing harm. And it would make
life a whole lot easier and safer for the people behind me -- police officers.
Every senator will get a say on whether or not we should keep weapons of war and highcapacity
ammunition magazines that facilitate mass killings off our streets. The type of
assault rifle used in Aurora, for example, when paired with a high-capacity magazine, has one
purpose: to pump out as many bullets as possible, as fast as possible. It’s what allowed that
gunman to shoot 70 people and kill 12 in a matter of a few minutes. I don’t believe that
weapons designed for theaters of war have a place in movie theaters. Most Americans agree
with that.
Most of these ideas are not controversial. Right now, 90 percent of Americans -- 90 percent -
- support background checks that will keep criminals and people who have been found to be a
danger to themselves or others from buying a gun. More than 80 percent of Republicans
agree. Most gun owners agree. Think about it: How often do 90 percent of Americans agree
on anything?
And yet, there are already some senators back in Washington floating the idea that they
might use obscure procedural stunts to prevent or delay any of these votes on reform. Think
about that. They’re not just saying they’ll vote “no” on the proposal that most Americans
support. They’re saying they’ll do everything they can to avoid even allowing a vote on a
proposal that the overwhelming majority of the American people support. They’re saying your
opinion doesn’t matter.
We knew from the beginning that change wouldn’t be easy. And we knew that there would be
powerful voices that would do everything they could to run out the clock, change the subject,
ignore the majority of the American people. We knew they’d try to make any progress collapse under the weight of fear and frustration, or
maybe people would just stop paying attention.
The only way this time will be different is if the American people demand that this time it must
be different -- that this time, we must do something to protect our communities and our kids.
We need parents, we need teachers, we need police officers, we need pastors, we need
hunters and sportsmen, Americans of every background to say, we’ve suffered too much pain
and care too much about our children to allow this to continue. We’re not going to just wait
for the next Newtown or the next Aurora before we act. And I genuinely believe that’s what
the overwhelming majority of Americans -- I don’t care what party they belong to -- that’s
what they want. They just want to see some progress.
It was interesting, during the conversation, a number of people talked about the trust issue.
Part of the reason it's so hard to get this done is because both sides of the debate sometimes
don't listen to each other. The people who take absolute positions on these issues, on both
sides, sometimes aren't willing to concede even an inch of ground.
And so one of the questions we talked about was, how do you build trust? How do you rebuild
some trust? And I told the story about two conversations I had. The first conversation was
when Michelle came back from doing some campaigning out in rural Iowa. And we were
sitting at dinner, and she had been to like a big county, a lot of driving out there, a lot of
farmland. And she said, if I was living out in a farm in Iowa, I'd probably want a gun, too. If
somebody just drives up into your driveway and you're not home -- you don't know who these
people are and you don't know how long it's going to take for the sheriffs to respond. I can
see why you'd want some guns for protection. That's one conversation.
I had another conversation just a couple of months ago with a mom from Chicago -- actually,
Evanston, Illinois -- whose son had been killed in a random shooting. And she said, you
know, I hate it when people tell me that my son was shot because he was in the wrong place
at the wrong time. He was in the right place. He was on his way to school. He wasn't in the
wrong place. He was exactly where he was supposed to be.
Now, both those things are true. And sometimes we're so divided between rural and urban,
and folks whose hunting is part of their lives and folks whose only experience with guns is
street crime. And the two sides just talk past one another. And more than anything, what I
want to just emphasize is there are good people on both sides of this thing, but we have to be
able to put ourselves in the other person's shoes. If you're a hunter, if you're a sportsman --
if you have a gun in your house for protection -- you've got to understand what it feels like for
that mom whose son was randomly shot.
And if you live in an urban area and you're worried about street crime, you've got to
understand what it might be like if you grew out on a ranch and your dad had been taking you
hunting all your life. And we had a couple of sportsmen in our conversation today, and I
thought one of them said something very important. He said, all my experiences with guns have been positive, but I realize that for others, all their
experiences about guns have been negative. Well, that's a start, right? If we start listening
to each other, then we should be able to get something done that's constructive. We should
be able to get that done.
One last thing I’m going to mention is that during this conversation -- I hope you don't mind
me quoting you, Joe. Joe Garcia, I thought, also made an important point, and that is that
the opponents of some of these common-sense laws have ginned up fears among responsible
gun owners that have nothing to do with what’s being proposed and nothing to do with the
facts, but feeds into this suspicion about government.
You hear some of these quotes: “I need a gun to protect myself from the government.” “We
can't do background checks because the government is going to come take my guns away.”
Well, the government is us. These officials are elected by you. They are elected by you. I
am elected by you. I am constrained, as they are constrained, by a system that our Founders
put in place. It’s a government of and by and for the people.
And so, surely, we can have a debate that's not based on the notion somehow that your
elected representatives are trying to do something to you other than potentially prevent
another group of families from grieving the way the families of Aurora or Newtown or
Columbine have grieved. We’ve got to get past some of the rhetoric that gets perpetuated
that breaks down trust and is so over the top that it just shuts down all discussion. And it’s
important for all of us when we hear that kind of talk to say, hold on a second. If there are
any folks who are out there right now who are gun owners, and you’ve been hearing that
somehow somebody is taking away your guns, get the facts. We’re not proposing a gun
registration system, we’re proposing background checks for criminals.
Don't just listen to what some advocates or folks who have an interest in this thing are
saying. Look at the actual legislation. That's what happened here in Colorado. And
hopefully, if we know the facts and we’re listening to each other, then we can actually move
forward.
And that’s what members of Congress need to hear from you. Right now, members of
Congress are at home in their districts. Many of them are holding events where they can hear
from their constituents. So I'm asking anyone out there who is listening today, find out where
your member of Congress stands on these issues. If they're not part of the 90 percent of
Americans who agree on background checks, then ask them why not. Why wouldn’t you want
to make it more difficult for a dangerous criminal to get his or her hands on a gun? Why
wouldn’t you want to close the loophole that allows too many criminals to buy a gun without
even the simplest of background checks? Why on Earth wouldn’t you want to make it easier
rather than harder for law enforcement to do their job?I know that some of the officers here today know what it's like to look into the eyes of a
parent or a grandparent, a brother or a sister, or a spouse who has just lost a loved one to an
act of violence. Some of those families, by the way, are here today. And as police officers,
you know as well as anybody, there is no magic solution to prevent every bad thing from
happening in the world. You still suit up, you put on your badge, put yourself at risk every
single day. Every single day, you go to work and you try to do the best you can to protect the
people you're sworn to protect and serve. Well, how can the rest of us as citizens do anything
less?
If there is just one step we can take to prevent more Americans from knowing the pain that
some of the families who are here have known, don’t we have an obligation to try? Don’t we
have an obligation to try? If these reforms keep one person from murdering dozens of
innocent children or worshippers or moviegoers in a span of minutes, isn't it worth fighting
for? I believe it is. That’s why I'm going to keep on working. I'm going to keep on giving it
my best efforts. But I'm going to need your help.
This is not easy. And I'll be blunt -- a lot of members of Congress, this is tough for them.
Because those who are opposed to any form of legislation affecting guns, they're very wellorganized
and they're very well-financed. But it can be done if enough voices are heard.
So I want to thank all the police officers who are here for giving their best efforts every single
day. I want to thank Governor Hickenlooper for his outstanding leadership. I want to thank
all the families who are here for your courage in being willing to take out of this tragedy
something positive. I want to thank the people of Colorado for coming together in sensible
ways. Let's see if we can get the whole country to do so.
Thank you, Denver. God bless you. And God bless the United States of America.Hello, Connecticut. Thank you. Well, thank you so much, everybody. Let me begin by
thanking Nicole, and Ian, for your brave words. I want to thank them and all the Newtown
families who have come here today, including your First Selectman, Pat Llodra. Nobody could
be more eloquent than Nicole and the other families on this issue. And we are so grateful for
their courage and willingness to share their stories again and again, understanding that
nothing is going to be more important in making sure the Congress moves forward this week
than hearing from them. I want to thank all the educators from Sandy Hook Elementary who
have come here as well the survivors -- I love you back. I do.
-- the survivors who still mourn and grieve, but are still going to work every day to love and
raise those precious children in their care as fiercely as ever.I want to thank Governor Malloy for his leadership. Very proud of him. I want to thank the
University of Hartford for hosting us this afternoon. Thank you, Hawks. And I want to thank
the people of Connecticut for everything you've done to honor the memories of the victims --
because you're part of their family as well.
One of your recent alumni, Rachel D'Avino, was a behavioral therapist at Sandy Hook. Two
alumni of your performing arts school, Jimmy Greene and Nelba Marquez-Greene, lost their
daughter, Ana -- an incredible, vibrant young girl who looked up to them, and learned from
them, and inherited their talents by singing before she could talk.
So every family in this state was shaken by the tragedy of that morning. Every family in this
country was shaken. We hugged our kids more tightly. We asked what could we do, as a
society, to help prevent a tragedy like that from happening again.
And as a society, we decided that we have to change. We must. We must change.
I noticed that Nicole and others refer to that day as "12/14." For these families, it was a day
that changed everything. And I know many of you in Newtown wondered if the rest of us
would live up to the promise we made in those dark days -- if we'd change, too; or if once the
television trucks left, once the candles flickered out, once the teddy bears were carefully
gathered up, that the country would somehow move on to other things.
Over the weekend, I heard Francine Wheeler, who lost her son Ben that day, say that the four
months since the tragedy might feel like a brief moment for some, but for her, it feels like it's
been years since she saw Ben. And she's determined not to let what happened that day just
fade away. "We're not going anywhere," she said. "We are here. And we are going to be
here." And I know that she speaks for everybody in Newtown, everybody who was impacted.
And, Newtown, we want you to know that we're here with you. We will not walk away from
the promises we've made. We are as determined as ever to do what must be done. In fact,
I'm here to ask you to help me show that we can get it done. We're not forgetting.
We can't forget. Your families still grieve in ways most of us can't comprehend. But so many
of you have used that grief to make a difference -- not just to honor your own children, but to
protect the lives of all of our children. So many of you have mobilized, and organized, and
petitioned your elected officials "with love and logic," as Nicole put it -- as citizens determined
to right something gone wrong.
And last week, here in Connecticut, your elected leaders responded. The Connecticut
legislature, led by many of the legislators here today, passed new measures to protect more
of our children and our communities from gun violence. And Governor Malloy signed that
legislation into law.So I want to be clear. You, the families of Newtown, people across Connecticut, you helped
make that happen. Your voices, your determination made that happen. Obviously, the elected
leaders did an extraordinary job moving it forward, but it couldn't have happened if they
weren't hearing from people in their respective districts, people all across the state. That's the
power of your voice.
And, by the way, Connecticut is not alone. In the past few months, New York, Colorado,
Maryland have all passed new, common-sense gun safety reforms as well.
These are all states that share an awful familiarity with gun violence, whether it's the horror of
mass killings, or the street crime that's too common in too many neighborhoods. All of these
states also share a strong tradition of hunting, and sport shooting, and gun ownership. It's
been a part of the fabric of people's lives for generations. And every single one of those states
-- including here in Connecticut -- decided that, yes, we can protect more of our citizens from
gun violence while still protecting our Second Amendment rights. Those two things don't
contradict each other. We can pass common-sense laws that protect our kids and protect our
rights.
So Connecticut has shown the way. And now is the time for Congress to do the same. Now is
the time for Congress to do the same. This week is the time for Congress to do the same.
Now, back in January, just a few months after the tragedy in Newtown, I announced a series
of executive actions to reduce gun violence and keep our kids safe. And I put forward
common-sense proposals -- much like those that passed here in Connecticut -- for Congress
to consider. And you'll remember in my State of the Union address, I urged Congress to give
those proposals a vote. And that moment is now.
As soon as this week, Congress will begin debating these common-sense proposals to reduce
gun violence. Your senators, Dick Blumenthal and Chris Murphy -- they're here -- your
Representatives, John Larson, Rosa DeLauro, Elizabeth Esty, Jim Hines, Joe Courtney, they
are all pushing to pass this legislation. But much of Congress is going to only act if they hear
from you, the American people. So here's what we have to do.  I appreciate that. Here's what we've got to do. We have to tell Congress
it's time to require a background check for anyone who wants to buy a gun so that people who
are dangerous to themselves and others cannot get their hands on a gun. Let's make that
happen.
We have to tell Congress it's time to crack down on gun trafficking so that folks will think
twice before buying a gun as part of a scheme to arm someone who won't pass a background
check. Let's get that done.We have to tell Congress it's time to restore the ban on military-style assault weapons, and a
10-round limit for magazines, to make it harder for a gunman to fire 154 bullets into his
victims in less than five minutes. Let's put that to a vote.
We have to tell Congress it's time to strengthen school safety and help people struggling with
mental health problems get the treatment they need before it's too late. Let's do that for our
kids and for our communities.
Now, I know that some of these proposals inspire more debate than others, but each of them
has the support of the majority of the American people. All of them are common sense. All of
them deserve a vote. All of them deserve a vote.
Consider background checks. Over the past 20 years, background checks have kept more than
2 million dangerous people from getting their hands on a gun. A group of police officers in
Colorado told me last week that, thanks to background checks, they've been able to stop
convicted murderers, folks under restraining orders for committing violent domestic abuse
from buying a gun. In some cases, they've actually arrested the person as they were coming
to purchase the gun.
So we know that background checks can work. But the problem is loopholes in the current law
let so many people avoid background checks altogether. That's not safe. It doesn't make
sense. If you're a law-abiding citizen and you go through a background check to buy a gun,
wouldn't you expect other people to play by the same rules?
If you're a law-abiding gun seller, wouldn't you want to know you're not selling your gun to
someone who's likely to commit a crime? Shouldn't we make it harder, not easier for
somebody who is convicted of domestic abuse to get his hands on a gun?
It turns out 90 percent of Americans think so. Ninety percent of Americans support universal
background checks. Think about that. How often do 90 percent of Americans agree on
anything? And yet, 90 percent agree on this -- Republicans, Democrats, folks who own guns,
folks who don't own guns; 80 percent of Republicans, more than 80 percent of gun owners,
more than 70 percent of NRA households. It is common sense.
And yet, there is only one thing that can stand in the way of change that just about everybody
agrees on, and that's politics in Washington. You would think that with those numbers
Congress would rush to make this happen. That's what you would think. If our democracy is
working the way it's supposed to, and 90 percent of the American people agree on something,
in the wake of a tragedy you'd think this would not be a heavy lift.
And yet, some folks back in Washington are already floating the idea that they may use
political stunts to prevent votes on any of these reforms. Think about that. They're not just saying they'll vote "no" on ideas that almost all Americans
support. They're saying they'll do everything they can to even prevent any votes on these
provisions. They're saying your opinion doesn't matter. And that's not right. That is not right.  We need a vote. We need a vote. Now, I've also heard some in the Washington press suggest that what
happens to gun violence legislation in Congress this week will either be a political victory or
defeat for me. Connecticut, this is not about me. This is not about politics. This is about doing
the right thing for all the families who are here that have been torn apart by gun violence.
It's about them and all the families going forward, so we can prevent this from happening
again. That's what it's about. It's about the law enforcement officials putting their lives at risk.
That's what this is about. This is not about politics. This is not about politics.
This is about these families and families all across the country who are saying let's make it a
little harder for our kids to get gunned down.
When I said in my State of the Union address that these proposals deserve a vote -- that
families of Newtown, and Aurora, and Tucson, and a former member of Congress, Gabby
Giffords, that they all deserved a vote -– virtually every member of that chamber stood up
and applauded. And now they're going to start denying your families a vote when the cameras
are off and when the lobbyists have worked what they do? You deserve better than that. You
deserve a vote.
Now, look, we knew from the beginning of this debate that change would not be easy. We
knew that there would be powerful interests that are very good at confusing the subject, that
are good at amplifying conflict and extremes, that are good at drowning out rational debate,
good at ginning up irrational fears, all of which stands in the way of progress.But if our history teaches us anything, then it's up to us –- the people -– to stand up to those
who say we can't, or we won't; stand up for the change that we need. And I believe that
that's what the American people are looking for.
When I first ran for this office, I said that I did not believe the country was as divided as our
politics would suggest, and I still believe that. I know sometimes, when you watch cable news
or talk radio, or you browse the Internet, you'd think, man, everybody just hates each other,
everybody is just at each other's throats. But that's not how most Americans think about
these issues. There are good people on both sides of every issue.
So if we're going to move forward, we can't just talk past one another. We've got to listen to
one another. That's what Governor Malloy and all these legislative leaders did. That's why
they were able to pass bipartisan legislation.
I've got stacks of letters from gun owners who want me to know that they care passionately
about their right to bear arms, don't want them infringed upon, and I appreciate every one of
those letters. I've learned from them. But a lot of those letters, what they've also said is
they're not just gun owners; they're also parents or police officers or veterans, and they agree
that we can't stand by and keep letting these tragedies happen; that with our rights come
some responsibilities and obligations to our communities and ourselves, and most of all to our
children. We can't just think about "us" -- we've got to think about "we, the people."
I was in Colorado. I told a story about Michelle. She came back from a trip to rural Iowa; we
were out there campaigning. Sometimes it would be miles between farms, let alone towns.
And she said, you know, coming back, I can understand why somebody would want a gun for
protection. If somebody drove up into the driveway and, Barack, you weren't home, the
sheriff lived miles away, I might want that security. So she can understand what it might be
like in terms of somebody wanting that kind of security.
On the other hand, I also talked to a hunter last week who said, all my experiences with guns
have been positive, but I also realize that for others, all their experiences with guns have
been negative.
And when he said that, I thought about the mom I met from suburban Chicago whose son was
killed in a random shooting. And this mom told me, I hate it when people tell me that my son
was in the wrong place at the wrong time. He was on his way to school. He was exactly where
he was supposed to be. He was in the right place at the right time, and he still got shot.
The kids at Sandy Hook were where they were supposed to be. So were those moviegoers in
Aurora. So were those worshippers in Oak Creek. So was Gabby Giffords. She was at a
supermarket, listening to the concerns of her constituents. They were exactly where they were
supposed to be. They were also exercising their rights -- to assemble peaceably; to worship
freely and safely. They were exercising the rights of life and liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. So surely, we
can reconcile those two things. Surely, America doesn't have to be divided between rural and
urban, and Democrat and Republican when it comes to something like this.
If you're an American who wants to do something to prevent more families from knowing the
immeasurable anguish that these families here have known, then we have to act. Now is the
time to get engaged. Now is the time to get involved. Now is the time to push back on fear,
and frustration, and misinformation. Now is the time for everybody to make their voices heard
from every state house to the corridors of Congress.
And I'm asking everyone listening today, find out where your member of Congress stands on
this. If they're not part of the 90 percent of Americans who agree on background checks, then
ask them, why not? Why wouldn't you want to make it easier for law enforcement to do their
job? Why wouldn't you want to make it harder for a dangerous person to get his or her hands
on a gun? What's more important to you: our children, or an A-grade from the gun lobby?
I've heard Nicole talk about what her life has been like since Dylan was taken from her in
December. And one thing she said struck me. She said, "Every night, I beg for him to come to
me in my dreams so that I can see him again. And during the day, I just focus on what I need
to do to honor him and make change." Now, if Nicole can summon the courage to do that,
how can the rest of us do any less? How can we do any less?
If there is even one thing we can do to protect our kids, don't we have an obligation to try? If
there is even one step we can take to keep somebody from murdering dozens of innocents in
the span of minutes, shouldn't we be taking that step? If there is just one thing we can do to
keep one father from having to bury his child, isn't that worth fighting for?
I've got to tell you, I've had tough days in the presidency -- I've said this before. The day
Newtown happened was the toughest day of my presidency. But I've got to tell you, if we
don't respond to this, that will be a tough day for me, too. Because we've got to expect more
from ourselves, and we've got to expect more from Congress. We've got to believe that every
once in a while, we set politics aside and we just do what's right. We've got to believe that.
And if you believe that, I'm asking you to stand up. If you believe in the right to bears arms,
like I do, but think we should prevent an irresponsible few from inflicting harm -- stand up.
Stand up.
If you believe that the families of Newtown and Aurora and Tucson and Virginia Tech and the
thousands of Americans who have been gunned down in the last four months deserve a vote,
we all have to stand up.
If you want the people you send to Washington to have just an iota of the courage that the
educators at Sandy Hook showed when danger arrived on their doorstep, then we're all going
to have to stand up. And if we do, if we come together and raise our voices together and demand this change
together, I'm convinced cooperation and common sense will prevail. We will find sensible,
intelligent ways to make this country stronger and safer for our children.
So let's do the right thing. Let's do right by our kids. Let's do right by these families. Let's get
this done. Connecticut, thank you. God bless you. God bless the United States of America.