To President Bush and Mrs. Bush; to President Clinton and now-former Secretary Clinton; to
President George H.W. Bush and Mrs. Bush; to President and Mrs. Carter; to current and
former world leaders and all the distinguished guests here today: Michelle and I are honored
to be with you to mark this historic occasion.
This is a Texas-sized party. And that’s worthy of what we’re here to do today: honor the life
and legacy of the 43rd President of the United States, George W. Bush.
When all the living former Presidents are together, it’s also a -- a special day for our
democracy. We’ve been called "the world’s most exclusive club" -- and we do have a pretty
nice clubhouse. But the truth is, our club is more like a support group.
The last time we all got together was just before I took office -- and I needed that. Because as
each of these leaders will tell you, no matter how much you may think you’re ready to assume
the office of the presidency, it’s impossible to truly understand the nature of the job until it’s
yours, until you’re sitting at that desk.And that’s why every President gains a greater appreciation for all of those who served before
them; for the leaders from both parties who've taken on the momentous challenges and felt
the enormous weight of the nation on their shoulders. And for me, that appreciation very
much extends to President Bush.
The first thing I found in that desk the day I took office was a -- a letter from George, and one
that demonstrated his compassion and his generosity. For he knew that I would come to learn
what he had learned -- that being President, above all, is a humbling job. There are moments
where you make mistakes.
There are times where you wish you could turn back the clock. And what I know is true about
President Bush, and I hope my successor will say about me, is that we love this country and
we do our best.
Now, in the past, President Bush has said it’s impossible to pass judgment on his presidency
while he’s still alive. So maybe this is a little bit premature. But even now, there are certain
things that we know for certain.
We know about the son who was raised by two strong, loving parents in Midland, famous --
famously inheriting, as he says, "my daddy’s eyes and my mother’s mouth"; the young boy
who once came home after a trip to a museum and proudly presented his horrified mother
with a small dinosaur tailbone he had smuggled home in his pocket.
I’ll bet that went over great with Barbara.
We know about the young man who met the love of his life at a dinner party, ditching his
plans to go to bed early and instead talking with the brilliant and charming Laura Welch late
into the night.
We know about the father who raised two remarkable, caring, beautiful daughters, even after
they tried to discourage him from running for President, saying, "Dad, you’re not as cool as
you think you are." Mr. President, I can relate. And now we see President Bush, the
grandfather, just beginning to spoil his brand-new granddaughter.
So we know President Bush the man. And what President Clinton said is absolutely true -- to
know the man is to like the man, because he’s comfortable in his own skin. He knows who he
is. He doesn’t put on any pretenses. He takes his job seriously, but he doesn’t take himself
too seriously. He is a good man.
But we also know something about George Bush the leader. As we walk through this library,
obviously we’re reminded of the incredible strength and resolve that came through that
bullhorn as he stood amid the rubble and the ruins of Ground Zero, promising to deliver
justice to those who had sought to destroy our way of life. We remember the compassion that he showed by leading the global fight against HIV/AIDS
and malaria, helping to save millions of lives and reminding people in some of the poorest
corners of the globe that America cares and that we’re here to help.
We remember his commitment to reaching across the aisle to unlikely allies like Ted Kennedy,
because he believed that we had to reform our schools in ways that help every child learn, not
just some; that we have to repair a broken immigration system; and that this progress is only
possible when we do it together.
Seven years ago, President Bush restarted an important conversation by speaking with the
American people about our history as a nation of laws and a nation of immigrants. And even
though comprehensive immigration reform has taken a little longer than any of us expected, I
am hopeful that this year, with the help of Speaker Boehner and some of the senators and
members of Congress who are here today, that we bring it home -- for our families, and our
economy, and our security, and for this incredible country that we love. And if we do that, it
will be in large part thanks to all the hard work of President George W. Bush.
And finally, a President bears no greater decision and no more solemn burden than serving as
Commander-in-Chief of the greatest military that the world has ever known. As President
Bush himself has said, "America must and will keep its word to the men and women who have
given us so much." So even as we Americans may at times disagree on matters of foreign
policy, we share a profound respect and reverence for the men and women of our military and
their families. And we are united in our determination to comfort the families of the fallen and
to care for those who wear the uniform of the United States.
On the flight back from Russia, after negotiating with Nikita Khrushchev at the height of the
Cold War, President Kennedy's secretary found a small slip of paper on which the President
had written a favorite saying: "I know there is a God. And I see a storm coming. If he has a
place for me, I believe I am ready."
No one can be completely ready for this office. But America needs leaders who are willing to
face the storm head on, even as they pray for God's strength and wisdom so that they can do
what they believe is right. And that’s what the leaders with whom I share this stage have all
done. That’s what President George W. Bush chose to do. That’s why I'm honored to be part
of today's celebration.
Mr. President, for your service, for your courage, for your sense of humor, and, most of all, for
your love of country: Thank you very much.
From all the citizens of the United States of America, God bless you.
And God bless these United States.
Well thank you, Senator Cornyn, Governor Perry, President Starr, gathered dignitaries, the
community of Baylor and Waco -- most of all, the family and the friends and neighbors of
West, Texas.
I cannot match the power of the voices you just heard on that video. And no words
adequately describe the courage that was displayed on that deadly night. What I can do is
offer the love and support and prayers of the nation.
The Book of Psalms tells us:
For you, O God, have tested us; you have tried us. We went through fire and through
water; yet you have brought us out to a place of abundance.
We went through fire and through water; yet you have brought us out to a place of
abundance.1
For this state, and for our country, these have been trying and difficult days. We gather here
in Texas to mourn the brave men who went through fire and all those who have been taken
from us. We remain mindful of our fellow Americans in flooded states to the north who endure
the high waters. We pray for those in Boston who have been tested, and the wounded whose
greatest tests still lie ahead.But know this: While the eyes of the world may have been fixed on places far away, our
hearts have also been here in your time of tribulation. And even amidst such sorrow and so
much pain, we recognize God’s abundance. We give thanks for the courage and the
compassion and the incredible grace of the people of West.
We're grateful for Mayor Muska and Mayor Duncan, and all those who have shown such
leadership during this tragedy. And to the families and neighbors grappling with unbearable
loss, we are here to say, you are not alone. You are not forgotten. We may not all live here in
Texas, but we're neighbors, too. We're Americans, too, and we stand with you, and we do not
forget. And we'll be there even after the cameras leave and after the attention turns
elsewhere. Your country will remain ever ready to help you recover and rebuild and reclaim
your community.
Now until last week, I think it’s fair to say that few outside this state had ever heard of
West. And I suspect that’s the way most people in West like it. Now, it is true that weary
travelers, and now the wider world, know they can rely on the Czech Stop for a brief respite in
the middle of a long stretch of highway. I want to say, by the way, all the former Presidents in
Dallas send their thoughts and prayers, George W. and Laura Bush spoke longingly about the
kolaches -- and the even better company, as they’ve driven through West. And what -- what
they understood, and what all of you understand, is what makes West special is not the
attention coming from far-flung places. What makes West special, what -- what puts it on the
map is what makes it familiar: the people who live there; neighbors you can count on; places
that haven’t changed; things that are solid and true and lasting.
Most of the people in West know everybody in West. Many of you are probably descended
from some of those first settlers -- hardy immigrants who crossed an ocean and kept on
going. So for you, there’s no such thing as a stranger. When someone's in need, you reach
out to them and you support them and you do what it takes to help them carry on.
And that’s what happened last Wednesday, when a fire alarm sounded across a quiet Texas
evening. As we’ve heard, the call went out to volunteers -- not professionals -- people who
just love to serve, people who want to help their neighbors. A call went out to farmers and car
salesmen and welders and funeral home directors; the city secretary and the mayor. It went
out to folks who are tough enough and selfless enough to put in a full day’s work and then be
ready for more.
And together, you answered the call. You dropped your schoolwork, left your families, jumped
in fire trucks, and rushed to the flames. And when you got to the scene, you forgot fear and
you fought that blaze as hard as you could, knowing the danger, buying time so others could
escape. And then, about 20 minutes after the first alarm, the earth shook, and the sky went
dark -- and West changed forever.Today our prayers are with the families of all who we’ve lost -- the proud sons and daughters
of West whose memories will live on in our hearts. Parents who loved their kids, and leaders
who served their communities. They were young and old, from different backgrounds and
different walks of life. A few were just going about their business. An awful lot ran towards
the scene of disaster trying to help. One was described as the kind of guy whose phone was
always ringing with folks in need of help -- help he always provided. That’s just who these
folks were.
Our thoughts are with those who face a long road -- the wounded, the heartbroken, the
families who lost their homes and possessions in an instant. They’re going to need their
friends in West, but they’re also going to need their friends in Texas, and their friends all
across this country. They’ll still need you to answer that call. They will need those things that
are lasting and true. For, as Scripture teaches us, "a friend loves at all times, and a brother is
born for adversity."
To the people of West, just as we’ve seen the love you share in better times, as friends and
brothers and sisters, these hard days have shown your ability to stand tall in times of
unimaginable adversity.
You saw it in leaders like Mayor Muska, who lost close friends. And you saw it in the hospital
staff who spent the night treating people that they knew -- toiling through their tears as they
did what had to be done.
We saw it in the folks who helped evacuate an entire nursing home, including one man who
drove an elderly resident to safety and then came back to do it again, twice.
We saw it in the people so generous that when the Red Cross set up a shelter for folks who
couldn’t go back to their homes, not that many people showed up, because most had already
been offered a place to stay with their friends and family and neighbors.
Complete strangers drove from hundreds of miles to donate supplies. Firefighters from
surrounding communities manned the stations so surviving volunteers could recover from
their wounds. Right here at Baylor, students stood in line for hours to give blood. And a
nearby school district opened its doors to the students who can’t go back to their classrooms,
putting welcome signs on lockers and in the hallways.
So that's the thing about this tragedy. This small town’s family is bigger now. It extends
beyond the boundaries of West. And in the days ahead, this love and support will be more
important than ever, because there will be moments of doubt and pain and the temptation to
wonder how this community will ever fully recover. And the families who have lost such
remarkable men of the sort that we saw in that video, there are going to be times where they
simply don't understand how this could have happened.But today I see in the people of West, in your eyes, that what makes West special isn't going
to go away. And instead of changing who you are, this tragedy has simply revealed who
you’ve always been.
It’s the courage of Deborah Sulak, who works as a cashier just around the corner from the fire
station. She said, “It’s going to be tough for the families. But we’re going to rebound
because we’re fighters.” And that courage will bring West back.
It’s the love of Carla Ruiz, who used to live in West but now lives in Austin. And last week,
she drove all the way back. “I had to be here,” she said. “You have to be here for family.”
That love will keep West going.
It’s the faith of someone like Pastor John Crowder that will sustain the good people of West for
as long as it takes. His church was damaged in the explosion. So on Sunday, the
congregation assembled outside. "What happened Wednesday was awful,” he told them.
“But God is bigger than all of this." God is bigger than all of this and he is here with you in
West. He is bigger than all of this and he is here with you.
Going forward, it’s not just your town that needs your courage and your love and your faith.
America does, too. We need towns where if you don’t know what your kids are up to, then
chances are your neighbors do too, and they'll tell on those kids in a second. America needs
towns that holds fundraisers to help folks pay the medical bills and then take the time to drop
off a home-cooked meal, because they know a family is under stress. America needs
communities where there’s always somebody to call if your car gets stuck or your house gets
flooded. We need people who so love their neighbors as themselves that they’re willing to lay
down their lives for them.
America needs towns like West. That’s what makes this country great, is towns like West.
"For you, O God, have tested us; you have tried us. We went through fire and through water;
yet you have brought us out to a place of abundance."
You have been tested, West. You have been tried. You have gone through fire. But you are
and always will be surrounded by an abundance of love. You saw it in the voices on those
videos. You see it in the firefighters and first responders who are here. All across America,
people are praying for you and thinking of you. And when they see the faces of those
families, they understand that these are not strangers -- these are neighbors. And that’s why
we know that we will get through this.
God bless West. May God grant His peace on those that we’ve lost, His comfort to their
families. May He continue to bless this great state of Texas, and may He continue to bless
these United States of America. 