Let me begin by thanking Harris Wofford for his contributions to this country. In so many
different ways, he exemplifies what we mean by the word "citizen." And so we are very
grateful to him for all the work he has done; and I'm thankful for the gracious and thoughtful
introduction.
"We the people, in order to form a more perfect union." Two hundred and twenty one years
ago, in a hall that still stands across the street, a group of men gathered and, with these
simple words, launched America's improbable experiment in democracy. Farmers and
scholars, statesmen and patriots who had traveled across the ocean to escape tyranny and
persecution finally made real their Declaration of Independence at a Philadelphia convention
that lasted through the spring of 1787.
The document they produced was eventually signed, but ultimately unfinished. It was stained
by this nation's original sin of slavery, a question that divided the colonies and brought the
convention to a stalemate until the founders chose to allow the slave trade to continue for at
least 20 more years, and to leave any final resolution to future generations. 
Of course, the answer to the slavery question was already embedded within our Constitution -
- a Constitution that had at is very core the ideal of equal citizenship under the law; a
Constitution that promised its people liberty and justice, and a union that could be and should
be perfected over time.
And yet words on a parchment would not be enough to deliver slaves from bondage, or
provide men and women of every color and creed their full rights and obligations as citizens of
the United States. What would be needed were Americans in successive generations who were
willing to do their part -- through protests and struggles, on the streets and in the courts,
through a civil war and civil disobedience, and always at great risk -- to narrow that gap
between the promise of our ideals and the reality of their time.
This was one of the tasks we set forth at the beginning of this presidential campaign: to
continue the long march of those who came before us, a march for a more just, more equal,
more free, more caring, and more prosperous America. I chose to run for President at this
moment in history because I believe deeply that we cannot solve the challenges of our time
unless we solve them together, unless we perfect our union by understanding that we may
have different stories, but we hold common hopes; that we may not look the same and may
not have come from the same place, but we all want to move in the same direction: towards a
better future for our children and our grandchildren. And this belief comes from my unyielding
faith in the decency and generosity of the American people. But it also comes from my own
story.
I'm the son of a black man from Kenya and a white woman from Kansas. I was raised with the
help of a white grandfather who survived a Depression to serve in Patton's army during World
War II, and a white grandmother who worked on a bomber assembly line at Fort Leavenworth
while he was overseas. I've gone to some of the best schools in America and I've lived in one
of the world's poorest nations. I am married to a black American who carries within her the
blood of slaves and slave owners, an inheritance we pass on to our two precious daughters. I
have brothers, sisters, nieces, nephews, uncles, and cousins of every race and every hue
scattered across three continents. And for as long as I live, I will never forget that in no other
country on earth is my story even possible. It's a story that hasn't made me the most
conventional of candidates. But it is a story that has seared into my genetic makeup the idea
that this nation is more than the sum of its parts -- that out of many, we are truly one.
Now throughout the first year of this campaign, against all predictions to the contrary, we saw
how hungry the American people were for this message of unity. Despite the temptation to
view my candidacy through a purely racial lens, we won commanding victories in states with
some of the whitest populations in the country. In South Carolina, where the Confederate flag
still flies, we built a powerful coalition of African Americans and white Americans. This is not to
say that race has not been an issue in this campaign. At various stages in the campaign, some
commentators have deemed me either "too black" or "not black enough." We saw racial
tensions bubble to the surface during the week before the South Carolina primary. The press
has scoured every single exit poll for the latest evidence of racial polarization, not just in
terms of white and black, but black and brown as well.
And yet, it's only been in the last couple of weeks that the discussion of race in this campaign
has taken a particularly divisive turn. On one end of the spectrum, we've heard the implication
that my candidacy is somehow an exercise in affirmative action; that it's based solely on the
desire of wild and wide-eyed liberals to purchase racial reconciliation on the cheap. On the
other end, we've heard my former pastor, Jeremiah Wright, use incendiary language to
express views that have the potential not only to widen the racial divide, but views that
denigrate both the greatness and the goodness of our nation and that rightly offend white and
black alike.
Now I've already condemned, in unequivocal terms, the statements of Reverend Wright that
have caused such controversy, and in some cases, pain. For some, nagging questions remain:
Did I know him to be an occasionally fierce critic of American domestic and foreign policy? Of
course. Did I ever hear him make remarks that could be considered controversial while I sat in
the church? Yes. Did I strongly disagree with many of his political views? Absolutely, just as
I'm sure many of you have heard remarks from your pastors, priests, or rabbis with which you
strongly disagree.
But the remarks that have caused this recent firestorm weren't simply controversial. They
weren't simply a religious leader's efforts to speak out against perceived injustice. Instead,
they expressed a profoundly distorted view of this country, a view that sees white racism as
endemic and that elevates what is wrong with America above all that we know is right with
America; a view that sees the conflicts in the Middle East as rooted primarily in the actions of
stalwart allies like Israel instead of emanating from the perverse and hateful ideologies of
radical Islam.
As such, Reverend Wright's comments were not only wrong but divisive, divisive at a time
when we need unity; racially charged at a time when we need to come together to solve a set
of monumental problems: two wars, a terrorist threat, a falling economy, a chronic health
care crisis, and potentially devastating climate change -- problems that are neither black or
white or Latino or Asian, but rather problems that confront us all.
Given my background, my politics, and my professed values and ideals, there will no doubt be
those for whom my statements of condemnation are not enough. Why associate myself with
Reverend Wright in the first place, they may ask? Why not join another church? And I confess
that if all that I knew of Reverend Wright were the snippets of those sermons that have run in
an endless loop on the television sets and YouTube, if Trinity United Church of Christ
conformed to the caricatures being peddled by some commentators, there is no doubt that I
would react in much the same way.
But the truth is, that isn't all that I know of the man. The man I met more than twenty years
ago is a man who helped introduce me to my Christian faith, a man who spoke to me about
our obligations to love one another, to care for the sick and lift up the poor. He is a man who
served his country as a United States Marine, and who has studied and lectured at some of
the finest universities and seminaries in the country, and who over 30 years has led a church
that serves the community by doing God's work here on Earth -- by housing the homeless,
ministering to the needy, providing day care services and scholarships and prison ministries,
and reaching out to those suffering from HIV/AIDS.
In my first book, Dreams From My Father, I described the experience of my first service at
Trinity, and it goes as follows:
People began to shout, to rise from their seats and clap and cry out, a forceful wind
carrying the reverend's voice up to the rafters.
And in that single note -- hope -- I heard something else; at the foot of that cross,
inside the thousands of churches across the city, I imagined the stories of ordinary
black people merging with the stories of David and Goliath, Moses and Pharaoh, the
Christians in the lion's den, Ezekiel's field of dry bones.
Those stories of survival and freedom and hope became our stories, my story. The
blood that spilled was our blood; the tears our tears; until this black church, on this
bright day, seemed once more a vessel carrying the story of a people into future
generations and into a larger world. Our trials and triumphs became at once unique
and universal, black and more than black. In chronicling our journey, the stories and
songs gave us a meaning to reclaim memories that we didn't need to feel shame about
-- memories that all people might study and cherish and with which we could start to
rebuild.
That has been my experience at Trinity. Like other predominantly black churches across the
country, Trinity embodies the black community in its entirety -- the doctor and the welfare
mom, the model student and the former gang-banger. Like other black churches, Trinity's
services are full of raucous laughter and sometimes bawdy humor. They are full of dancing
and clapping and screaming and shouting that may seem jarring to the untrained ear. The
church contains in full the kindness and cruelty, the fierce intelligence and the shocking
ignorance, the struggles and successes, the love and, yes, the bitterness and biases that
make up the black experience in America.
And this helps explain, perhaps, my relationship with Reverend Wright. As imperfect as he
may be, he has been like family to me. He strengthens my faith, officiated my wedding, and
baptized my children. Not once in my conversations with him have I heard him talk about any
ethnic group in derogatory terms or treat whites with whom he interacted with anything but
courtesy and respect. He contains within him the contradictions -- the good and the bad -- of
the community that he has served diligently for so many years.
I can no more disown him than I can disown the black community. I can no more disown him
than I can disown my white grandmother, a woman who helped raise me, a woman who
sacrificed again and again for me, a woman who loves me as much as she loves anything in
this world, but a woman who once confessed her fear of black men who passed her by on the
street, and who on more than one occasion has uttered racial or ethnic stereotypes that made
me cringe.
These people are part of me. And they are part of America, this country that I love.
Now, some will see this as an attempt to justify or excuse comments that are simply
inexcusable. I can assure you it is not. And I suppose the politically safe thing to do would be
to move on from this episode and just hope that it fades into the woodwork. We can dismiss
Reverend Wright as a crank or a demagogue, just as some have dismissed Geraldine Ferraro
in the aftermath of her recent statements as harboring some deep -- deep-seated bias.
But race is an issue that I believe this nation cannot afford to ignore right now. We would be
making the same mistake that Reverend Wright made in his offending sermons about
America: to simplify and stereotype and amplify the negative to the point that it distorts
reality. The fact is that the comments that have been made and the issues that have surfaced
over the last few weeks reflect the complexities of race in this country that we've never really
worked through, a part of our union that we have not yet made perfect. And if we walk away
now, if we simply retreat into our respective corners, we will never be able to come together
and solve challenges like health care or education or the need to find good jobs for every
American.
Understanding -- Understanding this reality requires a reminder of how we arrived at this
point. As William Faulkner once wrote, "The past isn't dead and buried. In fact, it isn't even
past." We do not need to recite here the history of racial injustice in this country. But we do
need to remind ourselves that so many of the disparities that exist between the AfricanAmerican
community and the larger American community today can be traced directly to
inequalities passed on from an earlier generation that suffered under the brutal legacy of
slavery and Jim Crow. Segregated schools were, and are, inferior schools. We still haven't
fixed them, 50 years after Brown versus Board of Education. And the inferior education they
provided, then and now, helps explain the pervasive achievement gap between today's black
and white students.
Legalized discrimination, where blacks were prevented, often through violence, from owning
property, or loans were not granted to African-American business owners, or black
homeowners could not access FHA mortgages, or blacks were excluded from unions, or the
police force, or the fire department meant that black families could not amass any meaningful
wealth to bequeath to future generations. That history helps explain the wealth and income
gap between blacks and whites and the concentrated pockets of poverty that persist in so
many of today's urban and rural communities. 
A lack of economic opportunity among black men and the shame and frustration that came
from not being able to provide for one's family contributed to the erosion of black families, a
problem that welfare policies for many years may have worsened. And the lack of basic
services in so many urban black neighborhoods -- parks for kids to play in, police walking the
beat, regular garbage pick-up, building code enforcement -- all helped create a cycle of
violence, blight, and neglect that continues to haunt us.
This is the reality in which Reverend Wright and other African-Americans of his generation
grew up. They came of age in the late '50s and early '60s, a time when segregation was still
the law of the land and opportunity was systematically constricted. What's remarkable is not
how many failed in the face of discrimination, but how many men and women overcame the
odds, how many were able to make a way out of no way for those like me who would come
after them.
But for all those who scratched and clawed their way to get a piece of the American Dream,
there were many who didn't make it -- those who were ultimately defeated, in one way or
another, by discrimination. That legacy of defeat was passed on to future generations -- those
young men and increasingly young women who we see standing on street corners or
languishing in our prisons, without hope or prospects for the future. Even for those blacks who
did make it, questions of race, and racism, continue to define their world view in fundamental
ways. For the men and women of Reverend Wright's generation, the memories of humiliation
and doubt and fear have not gone away, nor has the anger and the bitterness of those years.
That anger may not get expressed in public, in front of white co-workers or white friends, but
it does find voice in the barbershop or the beauty shop or around the kitchen table. At times,
that anger is exploited by politicians to gin up votes along racial lines or to make up for a
politician's own failings. And occasionally it finds voice in the church on Sunday morning, in
the pulpit and in the pews. The fact that so many people are surprised to hear that anger in
some of Reverend Wright's sermons simply reminds us of that old truism that the most
segregated hour of American life occurs on Sunday morning.
That -- That anger is not always productive. Indeed, all too often it distracts attention from
solving real problems. It keeps us from squarely facing our own complicity within the AfricanAmerican
community in our own condition. It prevents the African-American community from
forging the alliances it needs to bring about real change. 
But the anger is real; it is powerful, and to simply wish it away, to condemn it without
understanding its roots only serves to widen the chasm of misunderstanding that exists
between the races.
In fact, a similar anger exists within segments of the white community. Most working and
middle-class white Americans don't feel that they've been particularly privileged by their race.
Their experience is the immigrant experience. As far as they're concerned, no one handed
them anything; they built it from scratch. They've worked hard all their lives, many times only
to see their jobs shipped overseas or their pensions dumped after a lifetime of labor. They are
anxious about their futures, and they feel their dreams slipping away. And in an era of
stagnant wages and global competition, opportunity comes to be seen as a zero sum game, in
which your dreams come at my expense. So when they are told to bus their children to a
school across town, when they hear that an African American is getting an advantage in
landing a good job or a spot in a good college because of an injustice that they themselves
never committed, when they're told that their fears about crime in urban neighborhoods are
somehow prejudice, resentment builds over time.
Like the anger within the black community, these resentments aren't always expressed in
polite company. But they have helped shape the political landscape for at least a generation.
Anger over welfare and affirmative action helped forge the Reagan Coalition. Politicians
routinely exploited fears of crime for their own electoral ends. Talk show hosts and
conservative commentators built entire careers unmasking bogus claims of racism while
dismissing legitimate discussions of racial injustice and inequality as mere political correctness
or reverse racism. And just as black anger often proved counterproductive, so have these
white resentments distracted attention from the real culprits of the middle class squeeze: a
corporate culture rife with inside dealing, questionable accounting practices, and short-term
greed; a Washington dominated by lobbyists and special interests; economic policies that
favor the few over the many. And yet, to wish away the resentments of white Americans, to
label them as misguided or even racist without recognizing they are grounded in legitimate
concerns, this, too, widens the racial divide and blocks the path to understanding.
This is where we are right now.
It's a racial stalemate we've been stuck in for years. And contrary to the claims of some of my
critics, black and white, I have never been so naive as to believe that we can get beyond our
racial divisions in a single election cycle or with a single candidate, particularly -- particularly a
candidacy as imperfect as my own. But I have asserted a firm conviction, a conviction rooted
in my faith in God and my faith in the American people, that, working together, we can move
beyond some of our old racial wounds and that, in fact, we have no choice -- we have no
choice if we are to continue on the path of a more perfect union.
For the African-American community, that path means embracing the burdens of our past
without becoming victims of our past. It means continuing to insist on a full measure of justice
in every aspect of American life. But it also means binding our particular grievances, for better
health care and better schools and better jobs, to the larger aspirations of all Americans -- the
white woman struggling to break the glass ceiling, the white man who's been laid off, the
immigrant trying to feed his family. And it means also taking full responsibility for our own
lives -- by demanding more from our fathers, and spending more time with our children, and
reading to them, and teaching them that while they may face challenges and discrimination in
their own lives, they must never succumb to despair or cynicism. They must always believe --
They must always believe that they can write their own destiny.
Ironically, this quintessentially American -- and, yes, conservative -- notion of self-help found
frequent expression in Reverend Wright's sermons. But what my former pastor too often failed
to understand is that embarking on a program of self-help also requires a belief that society
can change. The profound mistake of Reverend Wright's sermons is not that he spoke about
racism in our society. It's that he spoke as if our society was static, as if no progress had been
made, as if this country -- a country that has made it possible for one of his own members to
run for the highest office in the land and build a coalition of white and black, Latino, Asian,
rich, poor, young and old -- is still irrevocably bound to a tragic past. What we know, what we
have seen, is that America can change. That is true genius of this nation. What we have
already achieved gives us hope -- the audacity to hope -- for what we can and must achieve
tomorrow.
Now, in the white community, the path to a more perfect union means acknowledging that
what ails the African-American community does not just exist in the minds of black people;
that the legacy of discrimination -- and current incidents of discrimination, while less overt
than in the past -- that these things are real and must be addressed. 
Not just with words, but with deeds -- by investing in our schools and our communities; by
enforcing our civil rights laws and ensuring fairness in our criminal justice system; by
providing this generation with ladders of opportunity that were unavailable for previous
generations. It requires all Americans to realize that your dreams do not have to come at the
expense of my dreams, that investing in the health, welfare, and education of black and
brown and white children will ultimately help all of America prosper.
In the end, then, what is called for is nothing more and nothing less than what all the world's
great religions demand: that we do unto others as we would have them do unto us. Let us be
our brother's keeper, Scripture tells us. Let us be our sister's keeper. Let us find that common
stake we all have in one another, and let our politics reflect that spirit as well.
For we have a choice in this country. We can accept a politics that breeds division and conflict
and cynicism. We can tackle race only as spectacle, as we did in the O.J. trial; or in the wake
of tragedy, as we did in the aftermath of Katrina; or as fodder for the nightly news. We can
play Reverend Wright's sermons on every channel every day and talk about them from now
until the election, and make the only question in this campaign whether or not the American
people think that I somehow believe or sympathize with his most offensive words. We can
pounce on some gaffe by a Hillary supporter as evidence that she's playing the race card; or
we can speculate on whether white men will all flock to John McCain in the general election
regardless of his policies. We can do that. But if we do, I can tell you that in the next election,
we'll be talking about some other distraction, and then another one, and then another one.
And nothing will change.
That is one option.
Or, at this moment, in this election, we can come together and say, "Not this time." This time
we want to talk about the crumbling schools that are stealing the future of black children and
white children and Asian children and Hispanic children and Native-American children. This
time we want to reject the cynicism that tells us that these kids can't learn; that those kids
who don't look like us are somebody else's problem. The children of America are not "those
kids," -- they are our kids, and we will not let them fall behind in a 21st-century economy. Not
this time.
This time we want to talk about how the lines in the emergency room are filled with whites
and blacks and Hispanics who do not have health care, who don't have the power on their own
to overcome the special interests in Washington, but who can take them on if we do it
together.
This time we want to talk about the shuttered mills that once provided a decent life for men
and women of every race, and the homes for sale that once belonged to Americans from
every religion, every region, every walk of life. This time we want to talk about the fact that
the real problem is not that someone who doesn't look like you might take your job; it's that
the corporation you work for will ship it overseas for nothing more than a profit. This time --
This time we want to talk about the men and women of every color and creed who serve
together, and fight together, and bleed together under the same proud flag. We want to talk
about how to bring them home from a war that should've never been authorized and
should've never been waged. And we want to talk about how we'll show our patriotism by
caring for them, and their families, and giving them the benefits that they have earned.
I would not be running for President if I didn't believe with all my heart that this is what the
vast majority of Americans want for this country. This union may never be perfect, but
generation after generation has shown that it can always be perfected. And today, whenever I
find myself feeling doubtful or cynical about this possibility, what gives me the most hope is
the next generation -- the young people whose attitudes and beliefs and openness to change
have already made history in this election.
There's one story in particular that I'd like to leave you with today, a story I told when I had
the great honor of speaking on Dr. King's birthday at his home church, Ebenezer Baptist, in
Atlanta. There's a young, 23-year-old woman, a white woman named Ashley Baia, who
organized for our campaign in Florence, South Carolina. She'd been working to organize a
mostly African-American community since the beginning of this campaign, and one day she
was at a roundtable discussion where everyone went around telling their story and why they
were there. And Ashley said that when she was 9 years old, her mother got cancer. And
because she had to miss days of work, she was let go and lost her health care. They had to
file for bankruptcy, and that's when Ashley decided that she had to do something to help her
mom.
She knew that food was one of their most expensive costs, and so Ashley convinced her
mother that what she really liked and really wanted to eat more than anything else was
mustard and relish sandwiches -- because that was the cheapest way to eat. That's the mind
of a 9 year old. She did this for a year until her mom got better. And so Ashley told everyone
at the roundtable that the reason she had joined our campaign was so that she could help the
millions of other children in the country who want and need to help their parents too.
Now, Ashley might have made a different choice. Perhaps somebody told her along the way
that the source of her mother's problems were blacks who were on welfare and too lazy to
work, or Hispanics who were coming into the country illegally. But she didn't. She sought out
allies in her fight against injustice.
Anyway, Ashley finishes her story and then goes around the room and asks everyone else why
they're supporting the campaign. They all have different stories and different reasons. Many
bring up a specific issue. And finally they come to this elderly black man who's been sitting
there quietly the entire time. And Ashley asks him why he's there. And he doesn't bring up a
specific issue. He does not say health care or the economy. He does not say education or the
war. He does not say that he was there because of Barack Obama. He simply says to
everyone in the room, "I am here because of Ashley." "I'm here because of Ashley."
Now, by itself, that single moment of recognition between that young white girl and that old
black man is not enough. It is not enough to give health care to the sick, or jobs to the
jobless, or education to our children. But it is where we start. It is where our union grows
stronger. And as so many generations have come to realize over the course of the 221 years
since a band of patriots signed that document right here in Philadelphia, that is where
perfection begins.
Thank you very much, everyone. Thank you. 
Thank you. What a wonderful reception. Thank you, Saint Paul. Thank you, Minnesota.
Thank you, JoAnn Syverson for the wonderful introduction. 
Thank you, Michelle Obama and Malia Obama and Sasha Obama. Thank you to my brothers 
and sisters. Thank you to my staff. Thank you to our volunteers. Thank you to my political
team. Thank you to our campaign manager, David Plouffe, who never gets any credit, but has 
built the best political organization in the country. 
Thank you to my grandmother, who helped raise me, and is sitting in Hawaii somewhere right
now because she can't travel, but who poured everything she had into me, and who helped to
make me the man I am today. Tonight is for her. 
Tonight, Minnesota, after 54 hard­fought contests, our primary season has finally come to an
end. Sixteen months have passed since we first stood together on the steps of the Old State 
Capitol in Springfield, Illinois. Thousands of miles have been traveled; millions of voices have 
been heard. 
And because of what you said, because you decided that change must come to Washington,  because you believed that this year must be different than all the rest, because you chose to
listen not to your doubts or your fears, but to your greatest hopes and highest aspirations, 
tonight we mark the end of one historic journey with the beginning of another, a journey that
will bring a new and better day to America. Because of you, tonight I can stand here and say 
that I will be the Democratic nominee for the President of the United States of America.
I want to thank all those in Montana and South Dakota who stood up for change today. I want
to thank every American who stood with us over the course of this campaign, through the 
good days and the bad, from the snows of Cedar Rapids to the sunshine of Sioux Falls. And,
tonight, I also want to thank the men and woman who took this journey with me as fellow
candidates for President. 
At this defining moment for our nation, we should be proud that our Party put forth one of the 
most talented, qualified field of individuals ever to run for office. I have not just competed 
with them as rivals. I’ve learned from them as friends, as public servants, and as patriots who
love America and are willing to work tirelessly to make this country better. They are leaders of 
this Party and leaders that America will turn to for years to come. 
And that is particularly true for the candidate who has traveled further on this journey than 
anyone else: Senator Hillary Clinton has made history in this campaign. She has made history 
not just because she’s a woman who has done what no woman has done before, but because 
she is a leader who inspires millions of Americans with her strength, her courage, and her 
commitment to the causes that brought us here tonight. I congratulate her on her victory in
South Dakota, and I congratulate her on the race that she has run throughout this contest.  We’ve certainly had our differences over the last 16 months. But as someone who’s shared a 
stage with her many times, I can tell you that what gets Hillary Clinton up in the morning ­­ 
even in the face of tough odds ­­ is exactly what sent her and Bill Clinton to sign up for their 
first campaign in Texas all those years ago, what sent her to work at the Children’s Defense 
Fund and made her fight for health care as first lady, what led her to the United States Senate 
and fueled her barrier­breaking campaign for the presidency: an unyielding desire to improve 
the lives of ordinary Americans, no matter how difficult the fight may be. 
And you can rest assured that when we finally win the battle for universal health care in this 
country ­­ and we will win that fight ­­ she will be central to that victory. When we transform 
our energy policy and lift our children out of poverty, it will be because she worked to help 
make it happen. Our Party and our country are better off because of her, and I am a better 
candidate for having had the honor to compete with Hillary Rodham Clinton. 
There are those who say that this primary has somehow left us weaker and more divided.  Well, I say that, because of this primary, there are millions of Americans who've cast their 
ballot for the very first time. There are Independents and Republicans who understand this 
election isn’t just about a change of Party in Washington, but also about the need to change 
Washington. There are young people, and African­Americans, and Hispanic­Americans, and 
women of all ages who have voted in numbers that have broken records and inspired a nation. 
All of you chose to support a candidate you believe in deeply. But at the end of the day, we 
aren’t the reason you came out and waited in lines that stretched block after block to make 
your voice heard. You didn’t do that because of me or Senator Clinton or anyone else. You did 
it because you know in your hearts that at this moment, a moment that will define a 
generation, we cannot afford to keep doing what we’ve been doing. We owe our children a 
better future. We owe our country a better future.
And for all those who dream of that future tonight, I say: Let us begin the work together. Let
us unite in common effort to chart a new course for America.
In just a few short months, the Republican Party will arrive in St. Paul with a very different
agenda. They will come here to nominate John McCain, a man who has served this country 
heroically. I honor, we honor the service of John McCain, and I respect his many 
accomplishments, even if he chooses to deny mine. My differences with him are not personal.  They are with the policies he has proposed in this campaign, because while John McCain can
legitimately tout moments of independence from his Party in the past, such independence has 
not been the hallmark of his presidential campaign. 
It’s not change when John McCain decided to stand with George Bush 95 percent of the time, 
as he did in the Senate last year.
It’s not change when he offers four more years of Bush economic policies that have failed to
create well­paying jobs, or insure our workers, or help Americans afford the skyrocketing cost
of college, policies that have lowered the real incomes of the average American family, and 
widened the gap between Wall Street and Main Street, and left our children with a mountain
of debt. 
It’s not change when he promises to continue a policy in Iraq that asks everything of our 
brave men and women in uniform and nothing of Iraqi politicians, a policy where all we look 
for are reasons to stay in Iraq, while we spend billions of dollars a month on a war that isn’t
making the American people any safer. So, I’ll say this: There are many words to describe 
John McCain’s attempt to pass off his embrace of George Bush’s policies as bipartisan and 
new, but “change” is not one of them. “Change” is not one of them, because change is a 
foreign policy that doesn’t begin and end with a war that should’ve never been authorized and 
never been waged. 
I won’t stand here and pretend that there are many good options left in Iraq, but what’s not
an option is leaving our troops in that country for the next hundred years, especially at a time 
when our military is overstretched, our nation is isolated, and nearly every other threat to
America is being ignored. We must be as careful getting out of Iraq as we were careless 
getting in, but start leaving we must. It’s time for Iraqis to take responsibility for their future. 
It’s time to rebuild our military and give our veterans the care and the benefits they deserve 
when they come home. 
It's time to refocus our efforts on Al Qaida’s leadership and Afghanistan, and rally the world 
against the common threats of the 21st century: terrorism and nuclear weapons, climate 
change and poverty, genocide and disease. That’s what change is. 
Change, Minnesota, is realizing that meetings [sic] today’s threats requires not just our 
firepower, but the power of our diplomacy: tough, direct diplomacy, where the President of 
the United States isn’t afraid to let any petty dictator know where America stands and what
we stand for. We must once again have the courage and the conviction to lead the free world.
That is the legacy of Roosevelt and Truman and Kennedy. That’s what the American people 
demand. That’s what change is. 
Change is building an economy that rewards not just wealth, but the work and the workers 
who created it. It’s understanding that the struggles facing working families can’t be solved by 
spending billions of dollars on more tax breaks for big corporations and wealthy CEOs, but by 
giving a middle­class tax break to those who need it, and investing in our crumbling 
infrastructure, and transforming how we use energy, and improving our schools, and renewing 
our commitment to science and innovation. It’s understanding that fiscal responsibility and 
shared prosperity can go hand­in­hand, as they did when Bill Clinton was President. 
John McCain has spent a lot of time talking about trips to Iraq in the last few weeks, but
maybe if he spent some time taking trips to the cities and towns that have been hardest hit by 
this economy ­­ cities in Michigan, and Ohio, and right here in Minnesota ­­ he’d understand 
the kind of change that people are looking for.
Maybe if he went to Iowa and met the student who works the night shift after a full day of 
class and still can’t pay the medical bills for a sister who’s ill, he’d understand she can’t afford 
four more years of a health care plan that only takes care of the healthy and the wealthy. She 
needs us to pass health care right now, a plan that guarantees insurance to every American
who wants it and brings down premiums for every family who needs it. That’s the change we 
need, Minnesota.
Maybe if John McCain went to Pennsylvania and he met the man who lost his job, but can’t
even afford the gas to drive around and look for a new one, he’d understand we can’t afford 
four more years of our addiction to oil from dictators. That man needs us to pass an energy 
policy that works with automakers to raise fuel standards, and makes corporations pay for 
their pollution, and oil companies invest their record profits in a clean energy future, an
energy policy that will create millions of new jobs that pay well and can’t be outsourced.
That’s the change we need, Minnesota.
And maybe if John McCain spent some time in the schools of South Carolina or St. Paul,  Minnesota, or where he spoke tonight in New Orleans, Louisiana, he’d understand that we 
can’t afford to leave the money behind for No Child Left Behind; that we owe it to our children
to invest in early­childhood education; and recruit an army of new teachers and give them 
better pay and more support; and finally decide that, in this global economy, the chance to
get a college education should not be a privilege for the few, but a birthright of every 
American. That’s the change we need in America. That’s why I’m running for President of the 
United States. 
Now, the other side will come here in September and offer a very different set of policies and 
positions, and that is a good thing. That is a debate I look forward to. It is a debate that the 
American people deserve on the issues that will help determine the future of this country and 
the future for our children. But what you don’t deserve is another election that’s governed by 
fear, and innuendo, and division. What you won’t hear from this campaign or this Party is the 
kind of politics that uses religion as a wedge and patriotism as a bludgeon.
What you won’t see from this campaign or this Party is a politics that sees our opponents not
as competitors to challenge, but enemies to polarize, because we may call ourselves 
Democrats and Republicans, but we are Americans first. We are always Americans first. 
Despite what the good senator from Arizona may have said tonight, I’ve seen people of 
differing views and opinions find common cause many times during my two decades in public 
life, and I’ve brought many together myself. I’ve walked arm­in­arm with community leaders 
on the south side of Chicago and watched tensions fade as black and white and Latino fought
together for good jobs and good schools. I’ve sat across the table from law enforcement
officials and civil rights advocates to reform a criminal justice system that sent 13 innocent
people to death row. I’ve worked with friends in the other Party to provide more children with
health insurance and more working families with a tax break, to curb the spread of nuclear 
weapons and ensure that the American people know where their tax dollars are being spent,  and to reduce the influence of lobbyists who have all too often set the agenda in Washington. 
In our country, I have found that this cooperation happens not because we agree on 
everything, but because, behind all the false labels and false divisions and categories that
define us, beyond all the petty bickering and point­scoring in Washington, Americans are a 
decent, generous, compassionate people, united by common challenges and common hopes.
And every so often, there are moments which call on that fundamental goodness to make this 
country great again. So it was for that band of patriots who declared in a Philadelphia hall the 
formation of a more perfect union, and for all those who gave on the fields of Gettysburg and 
Antietam their last full measure of devotion to save that same union. So it was for the 
greatest generation that conquered fear itself, and liberated a continent from tyranny, and 
made this country home to untold opportunity and prosperity. So it was for the workers who
stood out on the picket lines, the women who shattered glass ceilings, the children who
braved a Selma bridge for freedom’s cause. So it has been for every generation that faced 
down the greatest challenges and the most improbable odds to leave their children a world 
that’s better and kinder and more just. 
And so it must be for us. 
America, this is our moment. This is our time, our time to turn the page on the policies of the 
past, our time to bring new energy and new ideas to the challenges we face, our time to offer 
a new direction for this country that we love. 
The journey will be difficult. The road will be long. I face this challenge with profound humility 
and knowledge of my own limitations, but I also face it with limitless faith in the capacity of 
the American people.
Because if we are willing to work for it, and fight for it, and believe in it, then I am absolutely 
certain that, generations from now, we will be able to look back and tell our children that this 
was the moment when we began to provide care for the sick and good jobs to the jobless. 
This was the moment when the rise of the oceans began to slow and our planet began to heal.
This was the moment when we ended a war, and secured our nation, and restored our image 
as the last, best hope on Earth. 
This was the moment, this was the time when we came together to remake this great nation
so that it may always reflect our very best selves and our highest ideals. 
Thank you, Minnesota. God bless you. 
God bless the United States of America.
