Please, everybody have a seat. Thank you for the wonderful introduction, David. And thank
you for the great work that you are doing each and every day. And I appreciate such a warm
welcome. Some of you I've gotten a chance to know; many of you I'm meeting for the first
time. But the spirit of the U.S. Hispanic Chamber of Commerce, the desire to create jobs and
provide opportunity to people who sometimes have been left out -- that's exactly what this
administration is about. That's the essence of the American Dream. And so I'm very proud to
have a chance to speak with all of you.
You know, every so often, throughout our history, a generation of Americans bears the
responsibility of seeing this country through difficult times and protecting the dream of its
founding for posterity. This is a responsibility that's fallen to our generation. Meeting it will
require steering our nation's economy through a crisis unlike anything that we have seen in
our time.
In the short term, that means jump-starting job creation and restarting lending, and restoring
confidence in our markets and our financial system. But it also means taking steps that not
only advance our recovery, but lay the foundation for lasting, shared prosperity. 
I know there's some who believe we can only handle one challenge at a time. And they forget
that Lincoln helped lay down the transcontinental railroad and passed the Homestead Act and
created the National Academy of Sciences in the midst of civil war. Likewise, President
Roosevelt didn't have the luxury of choosing between ending a depression and fighting a war;
he had to do both. President Kennedy didn't have the luxury of choosing between civil rights
and sending us to the moon. And we don't have the luxury of choosing between getting our
economy moving now and rebuilding it over the long term.
America will not remain true to its highest ideals -- and America's place as a global economic
leader will be put at risk -- unless we not only bring down the crushing cost of health care and
transform the way we use energy, but also if we do -- if we don't do a far better job than
we've been doing of educating our sons and daughters; unless we give them the knowledge
and skills they need in this new and changing world.
For we know that economic progress and educational achievement have always gone hand in
hand in America. The land-grant colleges and public high schools transformed the economy of
an industrializing nation. The GI Bill generated a middle class that made America's economy
unrivaled in the 20th century. Investments in math and science under President Eisenhower
gave new opportunities to young scientists and engineers all across the country. It made
possible somebody like a Sergei Brin to attend graduate school and found an upstart company
called Google that would forever change our world.
The source of America's prosperity has never been merely how ably we accumulate wealth,
but how well we educate our people. This has never been more true than it is today. In a
21st-century world where jobs can be shipped wherever there's an Internet connection, where
a child born in Dallas is now competing with a child in New Delhi, where your best job
qualification is not what you do, but what you know -- education is no longer just a pathway
to opportunity and success, it's a prerequisite for success.
That's why workers without a four-year degree have borne the brunt of recent layoffs, Latinos
most of all. That's why, of the 30 fastest growing occupations in America, half require a
Bachelor's degree or more. By 2016, four out of every 10 new jobs will require at least some
advanced education or training.
So let there be no doubt: The future belongs to the nation that best educates its citizens --
and my fellow Americans, we have everything we need to be that nation. We have the best
universities, the most renowned scholars. We have innovative principals and passionate
teachers and gifted students, and we have parents whose only priority is their child's
education. We have a legacy of excellence, and an unwavering belief that our children should
climb higher than we did. 
And yet, despite resources that are unmatched anywhere in the world, we've let our grades
slip, our schools crumble, our teacher quality fall short, and other nations outpace us. Let me
give you a few statistics. In 8th grade math, we've fallen to 9th place. Singapore's middleschoolers
outperform ours three to one. Just a third of our 13- and 14-year-olds can read as
well as they should. And year after year, a stubborn gap persists between how well white
students are doing compared to their African American and Latino classmates. The relative
decline of American education is untenable for our economy, it's unsustainable for our
democracy, it's unacceptable for our children -- and we can't afford to let it continue.
What's at stake is nothing less than the American Dream. It's what drew my father and so
many of your fathers and mothers to our shores in pursuit of an education. It's what led Linda
Brown and Gonzalo and Felicitas Mendez to bear the standard of all who were attending
separate and unequal schools. It's what has led generations of Americans to take on that
extra job, to sacrifice the small pleasures, to scrimp and save wherever they can, in hopes of
putting away enough, just enough, to give their child the education that they never had. It's
that most American of ideas, that with the right education, a child of any race, any faith, any
station, can overcome whatever barriers stand in their way and fulfill their God-given
potential.
Of course, we've heard all this year after year after year after year -- and far too little has
changed. Certainly it hasn't changed in too many overcrowded Latino schools; it hasn't
changed in too many inner-city schools that are seeing dropout rates of over 50 percent. It's
not changing not because we're lacking sound ideas or sensible plans -- in pockets of
excellence across this country, we're seeing what children from all walks of life can and will
achieve when we set high standards, have high expectations, when we do a good job of
preparing them. Instead, it's because politics and ideology have too often trumped our
progress that we're in the situation that we're in.
For decades, Washington has been trapped in the same stale debates that have paralyzed
progress and perpetuated our educational decline. Too many supporters of my party have
resisted the idea of rewarding excellence in teaching with extra pay, even though we know it
can make a difference in the classroom. Too many in the Republican Party have opposed new
investments in early education, despite compelling evidence of its importance. So what we get
here in Washington is the same old debate about it's more money versus more reform,
vouchers versus the status quo. There's been partisanship and petty bickering, but little
recognition that we need to move beyond the worn fights of the 20th century if we're going to
succeed in the 21st century.
I think you'd all agree that the time for finger-pointing is over. The time for holding us --
holding ourselves accountable is here. What's required is not simply new investments, but
new reforms. It's time to expect more from our students. It's time to start rewarding good
teachers, stop making excuses for bad ones. It's time to demand results from government at
every level. It's time to prepare every child, everywhere in America, to out-compete any
worker, anywhere in the world. It's time to give all Americans a complete and competitive
education from the cradle up through a career. We've accepted failure for far too long. Enough
is enough. America's entire education system must once more be the envy of the world -- and
that's exactly what we intend to do.
That's exactly what the budget I'm submitting to Congress has begun to achieve. Now, at a
time when we've inherited a trillion-dollar deficit, we will start by doing a little housekeeping,
going through our books, cutting wasteful education programs. My outstanding Secretary of
Education, Arne Duncan, who's here today -- stand up, Arne, so everybody can see you. I'm
assuming you also saw my Secretary of Labor, Hilda Solis. But Secretary Duncan will use only
one test when deciding what ideas to support with your precious tax dollars: It's not whether
an idea is liberal or conservative, but whether it works. And this will help free up resources for
the first pillar of reforming our schools -- investing in early childhood initiatives.
This isn't just about keeping an eye on our children, it's about educating them. Studies show
that children in early childhood education programs are more likely to score higher in reading
and math, more likely to graduate from high school and attend college, more likely to hold a
job, and more likely to earn more in that job. For every dollar we invest in these programs,
we get nearly $10 back in reduced welfare rolls, fewer health care costs, and less crime.
That's why the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act that I signed into law invests $5
billion in growing Early Head Start and Head Start, expanding access to quality child care for
150,000 more children from working families, and doing more for children with special needs.
And that's why we are going to offer 55,000 first-time parents regular visits from trained
nurses to help make sure their children are healthy and prepare them for school and for life.
Even as we invest in early childhood education, let's raise the bar for early learning programs
that are falling short. Now, today, some children are enrolled in excellent programs. Some
children are enrolled in mediocre programs. And some are wasting away their most formative
years in bad programs. That includes the one-fourth of all children who are Hispanic, and who
will drive America's workforce of tomorrow, but who are less likely to have been enrolled in an
early childhood education program than anyone else.
That's why I'm issuing a challenge to our states: Develop a cutting-edge plan to raise the
quality of your early learning programs; show us how you'll work to ensure that children are
better prepared for success by the time they enter kindergarten. If you do, we will support
you with an Early Learning Challenge Grant that I call on Congress to enact. That's how we
will reward quality and incentivize excellence, and make a down payment on the success of
the next generation.
So that's the first pillar of our education reform agenda. The second, we will end what has
become a race to the bottom in our schools and instead spur a race to the top by encouraging
better standards and assessments. Now, this is an area where we are being outpaced by other
nations. It's not that their kids are any smarter than ours -- it's that they are being smarter
about how to educate their children. 
They're spending less time teaching things that don't matter, and more time teaching things
that do. They're preparing their students not only for high school or college, but for a career.
We are not. Our curriculum for 8th graders is two full years behind top performing countries.
That's a prescription for economic decline. And I refuse to accept that America's children
cannot rise to this challenge. They can, and they must, and they will meet higher standards in
our time.
So let's challenge our states -- let's challenge our states to adopt world-class standards that
will bring our curriculums to the 21st century. Today's system of 50 different sets of
benchmarks for academic success means 4th grade readers in Mississippi are scoring nearly
70 points lower than students in Wyoming -- and they're getting the same grade. Eight of our
states are setting their standards so low that their students may end up on par with roughly
the bottom 40 percent of the world.
That's inexcusable. That's why I'm calling on states that are setting their standards far below
where they ought to be to stop low-balling expectations for our kids. The solution to low test
scores is not lowering standards -- it's tougher, clearer standards. Standards like those in
Massachusetts, where 8th graders are -- we have a Massachusetts contingent here. In
Massachusetts, 8th graders are now tying for first -- first in the whole world in science. Other
forward-thinking states are moving in the same direction by coming together as part of a
consortium. And more states need to do the same. And I'm calling on our nation's governors
and state education chiefs to develop standards and assessments that don't simply measure
whether students can fill in a bubble on a test, but whether they possess 21st century skills
like problem-solving and critical thinking and entrepreneurship and creativity.
That is what we'll help them do later this year -- that what we're going to help them do later
this year when we finally make No Child Left Behind live up to its name by ensuring not only
that teachers and principals get the funding that they need, but that the money is tied to
results. And Arne Duncan will also back up this commitment to higher standards with a fund
to invest in innovation in our school districts.
Of course, raising standards alone will not make much of a difference unless we provide
teachers and principals with the information they need to make sure students are prepared to
meet those standards. And far too few states have data systems like the one in Florida that
keep track of a student's education from childhood through college. And far too few districts
are emulating the example of Houston and Long Beach, and using data to track how much
progress a student is making and where that student is struggling. That's a resource that can
help us improve student achievement, and tell us which students had which teachers so we
can assess what's working and what's not. That's why we're making a major investment in
this area that we will cultivate a new culture of accountability in America's schools. 
Now, to complete our race to the top requires the third pillar of reform -- recruiting,
preparing, and rewarding outstanding teachers. From the moment students enter a school,
the most important factor in their success is not the color of their skin or the income of their
parents, it's the person standing at the front of the classroom. That's why our Recovery Act
will ensure that hundreds of thousands of teachers and school personnel are not laid off --
because those Americans are not only doing jobs they can't afford to lose, they're rendering a
service our nation cannot afford to lose, either.
America's future depends on its teachers. And so today, I'm calling on a new generation of
Americans to step forward and serve our country in our classrooms. If you want to make a
difference in the life of our nation, if you want to make the most of your talents and
dedication, if you want to make your mark with a legacy that will endure -- then join the
teaching profession. America needs you. We need you in our suburbs. We need you in our
small towns. We especially need you in our inner cities. We need you in classrooms all across
our country.
And if you do your part, then we'll do ours. That's why we're taking steps to prepare teachers
for their difficult responsibilities, and encourage them to stay in the profession. That's why
we're creating new pathways to teaching and new incentives to bring teachers to schools
where they're needed most. That's why we support offering extra pay to Americans who teach
math and science to end a teacher shortage in those subjects. It's why we're building on the
promising work being done in places like South Carolina's Teachers Advancement Program,
and making an unprecedented commitment to ensure that anyone entrusted with educating
our children is doing the job as well as it can be done.
Now, here's what that commitment means: It means treating teachers like the professionals
they are while also holding them more accountable -– in up to 150 more school districts. New
teachers will be mentored by experienced ones. Good teachers will be rewarded with more
money for improved student achievement, and asked to accept more responsibilities for lifting
up their schools. Teachers throughout a school will benefit from guidance and support to help
them improve.
And just as we've given our teachers all the support they need to be successful, we need to
make sure our students have the teacher they need to be successful. And that means states
and school districts taking steps to move bad teachers out of the classroom. But let me be
clear -- Let me be clear -- the overwhelming number of teachers are doing an outstanding job
under difficult circumstances. My sister is a teacher, so I know how tough teaching can be.
But let me be clear: If a teacher is given a chance or two chances or three chances but still
does not improve, there's no excuse for that person to continue teaching. I reject a system
that rewards failure and protects a person from its consequences. The stakes are too high. We
can afford nothing but the best when it comes to our children's teachers and the schools
where they teach. 
Now, that leads me to the fourth part of America's education strategy –- promoting innovation
and excellence in America's schools. One of the places where much of that innovation occurs
is in our most effective charter schools. And these are public schools founded by parents,
teachers, and civic or community organizations with broad leeway to innovate -– schools I
supported as a state legislator and a United States senator.
But right now, there are many caps on how many charter schools are allowed in some states,
no matter how well they're preparing our students. That isn't good for our children, our
economy, or our country. Of course, any expansion of charter schools must not result in the
spread of mediocrity, but in the advancement of excellence. And that will require states
adopting both a rigorous selection and review process to ensure that a charter school's
autonomy is coupled with greater accountability –- as well as a strategy, like the one in
Chicago, to close charter schools that are not working. Provided this greater accountability, I
call on states to reform their charter rules, and lift caps on the number of allowable charter
schools, wherever such caps are in place.
Now, even as we foster innovation in where our children are learning, let's also foster
innovation in when our children are learning. We can no longer afford an academic calendar
designed for when America was a nation of farmers who needed their children at home
plowing the land at the end of each day. That calendar may have once made sense, but today
it puts us at a competitive disadvantage. Our children -- listen to this -- our children spend
over a month less in school than children in South Korea -- every year. That's no way to
prepare them for a 21st century economy. That's why I'm calling for us not only to expand
effective after-school programs, but to rethink the school day to incorporate more time -–
whether during the summer or through expanded-day programs for children who need it.
Now, I know longer school days and school years are not wildly popular ideas. Not with Malia
and Sasha -- not in my family, and probably not in yours. But the challenges of a new century
demand more time in the classroom. If they can do that in South Korea, we can do it right
here in the United States of America.
Of course, no matter how innovative our schools or how effective our teachers, America
cannot succeed unless our students take responsibility for their own education. That means
showing up for school on time, paying attention in class, seeking out extra tutoring if it's
needed, staying out of trouble. To any student who's watching, I say this: Don't even think
about dropping out of school. Don't even think about it.
As I said a couple of weeks ago, dropping out is quitting on yourself, it's quitting on your
country, and it's not an option -- not anymore. Not when our high school dropout rate has
tripled in the past 30 years. Not when high school dropouts earn about half as much as
college graduates. Not when Latino students are dropping out faster than just about anyone
else. It's time for all of us, no matter what our backgrounds, to come together and solve this
epidemic.
Stemming the tide of dropouts will require turning around our low-performing schools. Just
2,000 high schools in cities like Detroit and Los Angeles and Philadelphia produce over 50
percent of America's dropouts. And yet there are too few proven strategies to transform these
schools. And there are too few partners to get the job done.
So today, I'm issuing a challenge to educators and lawmakers, parents and teachers alike: Let
us all make turning around our schools our collective responsibility as Americans. And that will
require new investments in innovative ideas -- that's why my budget invests in developing
new strategies to make sure at-risk students don't give up on their education; new efforts to
give dropouts who want to return to school the help they need to graduate; and new ways to
put those young men and women who have left school back on a pathway to graduation.
Now, the fifth part of America's education strategy is providing every American with a quality
higher education -– whether it's college or technical training. Never has a college degree been
more important. Never has it been more expensive. And at a time when so many of our
families are bearing enormous economic burdens, the rising cost of tuition threatens to
shatter dreams. And that's why we will simplify federal college assistance forms so it doesn't
take a Ph.D to apply for financial aid.
That's why we're already taking steps to make college or technical training affordable. For the
first time ever, Pell Grants will not be subject to the politics of the moment or the whim of the
market –- they will be a commitment that Congress is required to uphold each and every
year. Not only that; because rising costs mean Pell Grants cover less than half as much tuition
as they did 30 years ago, we're raising the maximum Pell Grant to $5,550 a year and indexing
it above inflation. We're also providing a $2,500-a-year tuition tax credit for students from
working families. And we're modernizing and expanding the Perkins Loan Program to make
sure schools like UNLV don't get a tenth as many Perkins loans as schools like Harvard.
To help pay for all of this, we're putting students ahead of lenders by eliminating wasteful
student loan subsidies that cost taxpayers billions each year. All in all, we are making college
affordable for 7 million more students with a sweeping investment in our children's futures
and America's success. And I call on Congress to join me and the American people by making
these investments possible.
This is how we will help meet our responsibility as a nation to open the doors of college to
every American. But it will also be the responsibility of colleges and universities to control
spiraling costs. We can't just keep on putting more money in and universities and colleges not
doing their part to hold down tuitions. And it's the responsibility of our students to walk
through the doors of opportunity.
In just a single generation, America has fallen from 2nd place to 11th place in the portion of
students completing college. That is unfortunate, but it's by no means irreversible. With
resolve and the right investments, we can retake the lead once more. 
And that's why, in my address to the nation the other week, I called on Americans to commit
to at least one year or more of higher education or career training, with the goal of having the
highest proportion of college graduates in the world by the year 2020. And to meet that goal,
we are investing $2.5 billion to identify and support innovative initiatives across the country
that achieve results in helping students persist and graduate.
So let's not stop at education with college. Let's recognize a 21st century reality: Learning
doesn't end in our early 20s. Adults of all ages need opportunities to earn new degrees and
new skills -- especially in the current economic environment. That means working with all our
universities and schools, including community colleges -- a great and undervalued asset -- to
prepare workers for good jobs in high-growth industries; and to improve access to job training
not only for young people who are just starting their careers, but for older workers who need
new skills to change careers. And that's going to be one of the key tasks that Secretary Solis
is involved with, is making sure that lifelong learning is a reality and a possibility for more
Americans.
It's through initiatives like these that we'll see more Americans earn a college degree, or
receive advanced training, and pursue a successful career. And that's why I'm calling on
Congress to work with me to enact these essential reforms, and to reauthorize the Workforce
Reinvestment Act. That's how we will round out a complete and competitive education in the
United States of America.
So here's the bottom line: Yes, we need more money; yes, we need more reform; yes, we
need to hold ourselves more accountable for every dollar we spend. But there's one more
ingredient I want to talk about. No government policy will make any difference unless we also
hold ourselves more accountable as parents -- because government, no matter how wise or
efficient, cannot turn off the TV or put away the video games. Teachers, no matter how
dedicated or effective, cannot make sure your child leaves for school on time and does their
homework when they get back at night. These are things only a parent can do. These are
things that our parents must do.
I say this not only as a father, but also as a son. When I was a child my mother and I lived
overseas, and she didn't have the money to send me to the fancy international school where
all the American kids went to school. So what she did was she supplemented my schooling
with lessons from a correspondence course. And I can still picture her waking me up at 4:30
a.m., five days a week, to go over some lessons before I went to school. And whenever I'd
complain and grumble and find some excuse and say, "Awww, I'm sleepy," she'd patiently
repeat to me her most powerful defense. She'd say, "This is no picnic for me either, buster."
And when you're a kid you don't think about the sacrifices they're making. She had to work; I
just had to go to school. But she'd still wake up every day to make sure I was getting what I
needed for my education. 
And it's because she did this day after day, week after week, because of all the other
opportunities and breaks that I got along the way, all the sacrifices that my grandmother and
my grandfather made along the way, that I can stand here today as President of the United
States. It's because of the sacrifices -- See, I want every child in this country to have the
same chance that my mother gave me, that my teachers gave me, that my college professors
gave me, that America gave me.
You know these stories; you've lived them, as well. All of you have a similar story to tell. You
know, it's -- I want children like Yvonne Bojorquez to have that chance. Yvonne is a student at
Village Academy High School in California. Now, Village Academy is a 21st century school
where cutting edge technologies are used in the classroom, where college prep and career
training are offered to all who seek it, and where the motto is "respect, responsibility, and
results."
Now, a couple of months ago, Yvonne and her class made a video talking about the impact
that our struggling economy was having on their lives. And some of them spoke about their
parents being laid off, or their homes facing foreclosure, or their inability to focus on school
with everything that was happening at home. And when it was her turn to speak, Yvonne
said: "We've all been affected by this economic crisis. [We] are all college bound students;
we're all businessmen, and doctors and lawyers and all this great stuff. And we have all this
potential -- but the way things are going, we're not going to be able to [fulfill it]."
It was heartbreaking that a girl so full of promise was so full of worry that she and her class
titled their video, "Is anybody listening?" So, today, there's something I want to say to
Yvonne and her class at Village Academy: I am listening. We are listening. America is
listening. And we will not rest until your parents can keep your jobs -- we will not rest until
your parents can keep their jobs and your families can keep their homes, and you can focus
on what you should be focusing on -- your own education; until you can become the
businessmen, doctors, and lawyers of tomorrow, until you can reach out and grasp your
dreams for the future.
For in the end, Yvonne's dream is a dream shared by all Americans. It's the founding promise
of our nation: That we can make of our lives what we will; that all things are possible for all
people; and that here in America, our best days lie ahead. I believe that. I truly believe if I do
my part, and you, the American people, do yours, then we will emerge from this crisis a
stronger nation, and pass the dream of our founding on to posterity, ever safer than before.
Thank you very much. God bless you. God bless the United States of America.
Thank you. 
Thank you so much. Good afternoon. Bon après-midi. And guten tag. It is a great honor for me to be here in
Europe, to be here in Strasbourg. I want to make just a few acknowledgements. I want to thank the
President of France, Nicolas Sarkozy, for being such a terrific friend. I want to thank his wife, Madam
Sarkozy. They just hosted us at the palace and could not have been more gracious.
I want to thank the Charge d'Affaires, Mark Pekala, and his wife, Maria, who were helping to organize us;
Vincent Carver, who's the Counsel General in Strasbourg. And I want to thank the Mayor of Strasbourg,
Roland Ries, for his hospitality.
It is wonderful to be here with all of you and to have an opportunity not only to speak to you but also to take
some questions. You know, oftentimes during these foreign trips you see everything from behind a window,
and what we thought was important was for me to have an opportunity to not only speak with you but also to
hear from you, because that's ultimately how we can learn about each other. But before I take some
questions, I hope you don't mind me making a few remarks about my country and yours; the relationship
between the United States and the relationship between Europe.
Strasbourg has been known throughout history as a city at the crossroads. Over thousands of years, you
straddled many kingdoms and many cultures. Two rivers are joined here. Two religions have flourished in
your churches. Three languages comprise an ancient oath that bears the city's name. You served as a
center of industry and commerce, a seat of government and education, where Goethe studied and Pasteur
taught and Gutenberg imagined his printing press.
So it's fitting because we find ourselves at a crossroads as well -- all of us -- for we've arrived at a moment
where each nation and every citizen must choose at last how we respond to a world that has grown smaller
and more connected than at any time in its existence.
We've known for a long time that the revolutions in communications and technology that took place in the
20th century would hold out enormous promise for the 21st century -- the promise of broader prosperity and
mobility; of new breakthroughs and discoveries that could help us lead richer and fuller lives. But the same
forces that have brought us closer together have also given rise to new dangers that threaten to tear our
world apart -- dangers that cannot be contained by the nearest border or the furthest ocean.
Even with the Cold War now over, the spread of nuclear weapons or the theft of nuclear material could lead
to the extermination of any city on the planet. And this weekend in Prague, I will lay out an agenda to seek
the goal of a world without nuclear weapons.
We also know that the pollution from cars in Boston or from factories in Beijing are melting the ice caps in
the Arctic, and that that will disrupt weather patterns everywhere. The terrorists who struck in London, in
New York, plotted in distant caves and simple apartments much closer to your home. And the reckless
speculation of bankers that has new fueled a global economic downturn that's inflicting pain on workers and
families is happening everywhere all across the globe.
The economic crisis has proven the fact of our interdependence in the most visible way yet. Not more than a
generation ago, it would have been difficult to imagine that the inability of somebody to pay for a house in
Florida could contribute to the failure of the banking system in Iceland. Today what's difficult to imagine is
that we did not act sooner to shape our future.
Now, there's plenty of blame to go around for what has happened, and the United States certainly shares its
-- shares blame for what has happened. But every nation bears responsibility for what lies ahead, especially
now, for whether it's the recession or climate change, or terrorism, or drug trafficking, poverty, or the
proliferation of nuclear weapons, we have learned that without a doubt there's no quarter of the globe that
can wall itself off from the threats of the 21st century.
The one way forward -- the only way forward -- is through a common and persistent effort to combat fear
and want wherever they exist. That is the challenge of our time -- and we can not fail to meet it, together.
Now, we take for granted the peace of a Europe that's united, but for centuries Strasbourg has been
attacked and occupied and claimed by the warring nations of this continent. Now, today in this city, the
presence of the European Parliament and the Council of Europe stand as symbols of a Europe that is united
peaceful and free.
Now, we take this peace and prosperity for granted, but this destination was not easily reached, nor was it
predestined. The buildings that are now living monuments to European unity were not drawn from simple
blueprints. They were born out of the blood of the first half of the 20th century and the resolve of the second.
Men and women had to have the imagination to see a better future, and the courage to reach for it.
Europeans and Americans had to have the sense of common purpose to join one another, and the patience
and the persistence to see a long twilight struggle through.
It was 61 years ago this April that a Marshall Plan to rebuild Europe helped to deliver hope to a continent
that had been decimated by war. Amid the ashes and the rubble that surrounded so many cities like this
one, America joined with you in an unprecedented effort that secured a lasting prosperity not just in Europe,
but around the world -- on both sides of the Atlantic.
One year later, exactly 60 years ago tomorrow, we ensured our shared security when 12 of our nations
signed a treaty in Washington that spelled out a simple agreement: An attack on one would be viewed as an
attack on all. Without firing a single shot, this Alliance would prevent the Iron Curtain from descending on
the free nations of Western Europe. It would lead eventually to the crumbling of a wall in Berlin and the end
of the Communist threat. Two decades later, with 28 member nations that stretched from the Baltic to the
Mediterranean, NATO remains the strongest alliance that the world has ever known.
At the crossroads where we stand today, this shared history gives us hope -- but it must not give us rest.
This generation cannot stand still. We cannot be content merely to celebrate the achievements of the 20th
century, or enjoy the comforts of the 21st century; we must learn from the past to build on its success. We
must renew our institutions, our alliances. We must seek the solutions to the challenges of this young
century.
This is our generation. This is our time. And I am confident that we can meet any challenge as long as we
are together.
Such an effort is never easy. It's always harder to forge true partnerships and sturdy alliances than to act
alone, or to wait for the action of somebody else. It's more difficult to break down walls of division than to
simply allow our differences to build and our resentments to fester. So we must be honest with ourselves. In
recent years we've allowed our Alliance to drift. I know that there have been honest disagreements over
policy, but we also know that there's something more that has crept into our relationship. In America, there's
a failure to appreciate Europe's leading role in the world. Instead of celebrating your dynamic union and
seeking to partner with you to meet common challenges, there have been times where America has shown
arrogance and been dismissive, even derisive.
But in Europe, there is an anti-Americanism that is at once casual but can also be insidious. Instead of
recognizing the good that America so often does in the world, there have been times where Europeans
choose to blame America for much of what's bad.
On both sides of the Atlantic, these attitudes have become all too common. They are not wise. They do not
represent the truth. They threaten to widen the divide across the Atlantic and leave us both more isolated.
They fail to acknowledge the fundamental truth that America cannot confront the challenges of this century
alone, but that Europe cannot confront them without America.
So I've come to Europe this week to renew our partnership, one in which America listens and learns from
our friends and allies, but where our friends and allies bear their share of the burden. Together, we must
forge common solutions to our common problems.
So let me say this as clearly as I can: America is changing, but it cannot be America alone that changes. We
are confronting the greatest economic crisis since World War II. The only way to confront this
unprecedented crisis is through unprecedented coordination.
Over the last few days, I believe that we have begun that effort. The G20 summit in London was a success
of nations coming together, working out their differences, and moving boldly forward. All of us are moving
aggressively to restore growth and lending. All of us have agreed to the most substantial overhaul of our
international financial system in a generation. No one is exempt. No more will the world's financial players
be able to make risky bets at the expense of ordinary people. Those days are over. We are ushering a new
era of responsibility, and that is something we should all be proud of.
As we take these steps, we also affirm that we must not erect new barriers to commerce; that trade wars
have no victors. We can't give up on open markets, even as we work to ensure that trade is both free and
fair. We cannot forget how many millions that trade has lifted out of poverty and into the middle class. We
can't forget that part of the freedom that our nations stood for throughout the Cold War was the opportunity
that comes from free enterprise and individual liberty.
I know it can be tempting to turn inward, and I understand how many people and nations have been left
behind by the global economy. And that's why the United States is leading an effort to reach out to people
around the world who are suffering, to provide them immediate assistance and to extend support for food
security that will help them lift themselves out of poverty.
All of us must join together in this effort, not just because it is right, but because by providing assistance to
those countries most in need, we will provide new markets, we will drive the growth of the future that lifts all
of us up. So it's not just charity; it's a matter of understanding that our fates are tied together -- not just the
fate of Europe and America, but the fate of the entire world.
And as we restore our common prosperity, we must stand up for our common security. As we meet here
today, NATO has still embarked on its first mission overseas in Afghanistan, and my administration has just
completed a review of our policy in that region.
Now, I understand that this war has been long. Our allies have already contributed greatly to this endeavor.
You've sent your sons and daughters to fight alongside ours, and we honor and respect their service and
sacrifice.
And I also know that there's some who have asked questions about why are we still in Afghanistan? What
does this mean? What's its purpose? Understand we would not deploy our own troops if this mission was
not indispensable to our common security. As President, I can tell you there's no decision more difficult,
there's no duty more painful, than signing a letter to the family of somebody who has died in war.
So I understand that there is doubt about this war in Europe. There's doubt at times even in the United
States. But know this: The United States of America did not choose to fight a war in Afghanistan. We were
attacked by an al Qaeda network that killed thousands on American soil, including French and Germans.
Along the border of Afghanistan and Pakistan, those terrorists are still plotting today. And they're -- if there is
another al Qaeda attack, it is just as likely, if not more, that it will be here in Europe in a European city.
So I've made a commitment to Afghanistan, and I've asked our NATO partners for more civilian and military
support and assistance. We do this with a clear purpose: to root out the terrorists who threaten all of us, to
train the Afghan people to sustain their own security and to help them advance their own opportunity, and to
quicken the day when our troops come home.
We have no interest in occupying Afghanistan. We have more than enough to do in rebuilding America. But
this is a mission that tests whether nations can come together in common purpose on behalf of our common
security. That's what we did together in the 20th century. And now we need an alliance that is even stronger
than when it brought down a mighty wall in Berlin.
That's why we applaud France's decision to expand and deepen its participation in NATO, just as we
support a strong European defense. That's why we welcome Croatia and Albania into the fold. And that is
why we must ensure that NATO is equipped and capable of facing down the threats and challenges of this
new age. This is one of our central tasks.
And we also know that in the 21st century, security is more complex than military power. This is the
generation that must also stop the spread of the pollution that is slowly killing our planet, from shrinking
coastlines and devastating storms to widespread misery and famine and drought. The effects of climate
change are now in plain sight.
Europe has acted with a seriousness of purpose that this challenge demands. And in the last few months
I'm proud to say that America has begun to take unprecedented steps to transform the way that we use
energy. We appointed a special envoy to help us lead a global effort to reduce the carbon that we send in
the atmosphere.
But we all know that time is running out. And that means that America must do more. Europe must do more.
China and India must do more. Rolling back the tide of a warming planet is a responsibility that we have to
ourselves, to our children, and all of those who will inherit God's creation long after we are gone. So let us
meet that responsibility together. I am confident that we can meet it. But we have to begin today.
And let us resolve that when future generations look back on ours, they will be able to say that we did our
part to make this world more peaceful.
It's perhaps the most difficult work of all to resolve age-old conflicts, to heal ancient hatreds, to dissolve the
lines of suspicion between religions and cultures, and people who may not look like us, or have the same
faith that we do, or come from the same place. But just because it's difficult does not make the work any
less important. It does not absolve us from trying.
And to that end, America will sustain our effort to forge and secure a lasting peace between the Israelis and
the Palestinians. I've sent a clear message to the leaders and peoples of Iran that while we have real
differences, we also have mutual interests, and we seek new engagement based on mutual respect. And it
is in that spirit that America and Europe must reach out to the vast majority of Muslims in our nations and in
all nations. We seek only hope of peace and partnership, and the opportunity of a better life.
We cannot simply solve these conflicts militarily. We have to open our minds and we have to open our
hearts to the differences among us and the commonalities between us. With every threat that we face, a
new day is possible. We can't get there alone. As it was in the darkest days after World War II, when a
continent lay in ruins and an atomic cloud had settled over the world, we must make the journey together.
We know that transformational change is possible. We know this because of three reasons: First, because,
for all our differences, there are certain values that bind us together and reveal our common humanity: the
universal longing to live a life free from fear, and free from want; a life marked by dignity and respect and
simple justice.
Our two republics were founded in service of these ideals. In America, it is written into our founding
documents as "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." In France: "Liberté" -- absolutely -- "egalité,
fraternité." Our moral authority is derived from the fact that generations of our citizens have fought and bled
to uphold these values in our nations and others.
And that's why we can never sacrifice them for expedience's sake. That's why I've ordered the closing of the
detention center in Guantanamo Bay. That's why I can stand here today and say without equivocation or
exception that the United States of America does not and will not torture.
The second way that we can turn challenge into opportunity is through our persistence in the face of
difficulty. In an age of instant gratification, it's tempting to believe that every problem can and should be
solved in the span of a week. When these problems aren't solved, we conclude that our efforts to solve
them must have been in vain. But that's not how progress is made. Progress is slow. It comes in fits and
starts, because we try and we fail and then we try something else. And when there are setbacks and
disappointments we keep going. We hold firm to our core values, and we hold firm to our faith in one
another.
The third reason we know that we can change this world is because of men and women like the young
people who are here today. Each time we find ourselves at a crossroads, paralyzed by worn debates and
stale thinking, the old ways of doing things, a new generation rises up and shows the way forward. As
Robert Kennedy once told a crowd of students in South Africa, "It is a revolutionary world that we live in, and
thus, it is young people who must take the lead." Because young people are unburdened by the biases or
prejudices of the past. That is a great privilege of youth. But it's also a tremendous responsibility because it
is you who must ultimately decide what we do with this incredible moment in history.
We just emerged from an era marked by irresponsibility, and it would be easy to choose the path of
selfishness or apathy, of blame or division. But that is a danger that we cannot afford. The challenges are
too great. It is a revolutionary world that we live in, and history shows us that we can do improbable,
sometimes impossible things. We stand here in a city that used to stand at the center of European conflict;
only now it is the center of European union. We did that together. Now we must not give up on one another.
We must renew this relationship for a new generation, in a new century. We must hold firm to our common
values, hold firm to our faith in one another. Together, I'm confident that we can achieve the promise of a
new day.
Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you very much.
