Thank you, Tim, for your hard work on this issue and on our economic recovery.
The economic crisis we face is unlike any we've seen in our lifetime. It's a crisis of falling
confidence and rising debt, of widely distributed risk and narrowly concentrated reward; a
crisis written in the fine print of sub-prime mortgages, on the ledger lines of once mighty
financial institutions, and on the pink slips that have upended the lives of so many people
across this country and cost the economy 2.6 million jobs last year alone.
We know that even if we do everything that we should, this crisis was years in the making,
and it will take more than weeks or months to turn things around.
But make no mistake: A failure to act, and act now, will turn crisis into a catastrophe and
guarantee a longer recession, a less robust recovery, and a more uncertain future. Millions
more jobs will be lost. More businesses will be shuttered. More dreams will be deferred.
And that's why I feel such a sense of urgency about the economic recovery and reinvestment
plan that is before Congress today. With it, we can save or create more than three million
jobs, doing things that will strengthen our country for years to come. It's not merely a
prescription for short-term spending -- it's a strategy for long-term economic growth in areas
like renewable energy and health care and education.
Now, in the past few days I've heard criticisms that this plan is somehow wanting, and these
criticisms echo the very same failed economic theories that led us into this crisis in the first
place -- the notion that tax cuts alone will solve all our problems; that we can ignore
fundamental challenges like energy independence and the high cost of health care; that we can somehow deal with this in a piecemeal fashion and still expect our economy and our
country to thrive.
I reject those theories. And so did the American people when they went to the polls in
November and voted resoundingly for change. So I urge members of Congress to act without
delay. No plan is perfect, and we should work to make it stronger. No one is more committed
to making it stronger than me. But let's not make the perfect the enemy of the essential. Let's
show people all over the country who are looking for leadership in this difficult time that we
are equal to the task.
At the same time, we know that this recovery and reinvestment plan is only the first part of
what we need to do to restore prosperity and secure our future. We also need a strong and
viable financial system to keep credit flowing to businesses and families alike. And my
administration will do whatever it takes to restore our financial system. Our recovery depends
on it. And so in the next week, Secretary Geithner will release a new strategy to get credit
moving again -- a strategy that will reflect some of the lessons of past mistakes while laying
the foundation of the future.
But in order to restore trust in our financial system, we're going to have to do more than just
put forward our plans. In order to restore trust, we've got to make certain that taxpayer funds
are not subsidizing excessive compensation packages on Wall Street.
We all need to take responsibility. And this includes executives at major financial firms who
turned to the American people, hat in hand, when they were in trouble, even as they paid
themselves customary lavish bonuses. As I said last week, this is the height of irresponsibility.
It's shameful. And that's exactly the kind of disregard of the costs and consequences of their
actions that brought about this crisis: a culture of narrow self-interest and short-term gain at
the expense of everything else.
This is America. We don't disparage wealth. We don't begrudge anybody for achieving
success. And we certainly believe that success should be rewarded. But what gets people
upset -- and rightfully so -- are executives being rewarded for failure, especially when those
rewards are subsidized by U.S. taxpayers, many of whom are having a tough time
themselves.
For top executives to award themselves these kinds of compensation packages in the midst of
this economic crisis isn't just bad taste -- it's bad strategy -- and I will not tolerate it as
President. We're going to be demanding some restraint in exchange for federal aid -- so that
when firms seek new federal dollars, we won't find them up to the same old tricks.
As part of the reforms we're announcing today, top executives at firms receiving extraordinary
help from U.S. taxpayers will have their compensation capped at 500,000 dollars -- a fraction
of the salaries that have been reported recently. And if these executives receive any additional
compensation, it will come in the form of stock that can't be paid up until taxpayers are paid
back for their assistance.
Companies receiving federal aid are going to have to disclose publicly all the perks and
luxuries bestowed upon senior executives, and provide an explanation to the taxpayers and to
shareholders as to why these expenses are justified. And we're putting a stop to these kinds
of massive severance packages we've all read about with disgust; we're taking the air out of
golden parachutes.
We're asking these firms to take responsibility, to recognize the nature of this crisis and their
role in it. We believe that what we've laid out should be viewed as fair and embraced as basic
common sense.
And finally, these guidelines we're putting in place are only the beginning of a long-term
effort. We're going to examine the ways in which the means and manner of executive
compensation have contributed to a reckless culture and a quarter-by-quarter mentality that
in turn helped to wrought havoc in our financial system. We're going to be taking a look at
broader reforms so that executives are compensated for sound risk management, and
rewarded for growth measured over years, not just days or weeks.
We all have to pull together and take our share of responsibility. That's true here in
Washington. That's true on Wall Street. The American people are carrying a huge burden as a
result of this economic crisis: bearing the brunt of its effects as well as the cost of
extraordinary measures we're taking to address them. The American people expect and
demand that we pursue policies that reflect the reality of this crisis -- and that will prevent
these kinds of crises from occurring again in the future.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Please, be seated. Thank you, very much.
Madam Speaker, Leader Reid, members of Congress, dear friends, former colleagues:
It is a great honor to be here -- a place where Lincoln served, was inaugurated, and where the
nation he saved bid him a last farewell. As we mark the bicentennial of our 16th President's
birth, I cannot claim to know as much about his life and works as many who are also speaking
today, but I can say that I feel a special gratitude to this singular figure who in so many ways
made my own story possible -- and in so many ways made America's story possible.
It is fitting that we are holding this celebration here at the Capitol, for the life of this building
is bound ever so closely to the times of this immortal President. Built by artisans and
craftsmen, but also immigrants and slaves, it was here, in the rotunda, that Union soldiers
received help from a makeshift hospital; it was downstairs, in the basement, that they were
baked bread to give them strength; and it was in the Senate and House chambers where they
slept at night and spent some of their days.
What those soldiers saw when they looked on this building was a very different sight than the
one we see today, for it remained unfinished until the end of the war. The laborers who built
the dome came to work wondering each day whether that would be their last; whether the
metal they were using for its frame would be requisitioned for the war and melted down into
bullets. But each day went by without any orders to halt construction, and so they kept on
working, and kept on building.
And when President Lincoln was finally told of all the metal being used here, his response was
short and clear: That is as it should be. The American people needed to be reminded, he
believed, that even in a time of war, the work would go on; the people's business would
continue; that even when the nation itself was in doubt, its future was being secured; and
that on that distant day, when the guns fell silent, a national capitol would stand, with a
statue of freedom at its peak, as a symbol of unity in a land still mending its divisions.
It is this sense of unity, this ability to plan for a shared future even at a moment where our
nation was torn apart, that I reflect on today. And while there are any number of moments
that reveal that particular side of this extraordinary man, Abraham Lincoln -- that particular
aspect of his leadership -- there's one that I'd like to share with you today.
In the war's final weeks, aboard Grant's flagship, The River Queen, President Lincoln was
asked what was to be done with the rebel armies once General Lee surrendered. With victory
at hand, Lincoln could have sought revenge. He could have forced the South to pay a steep
price for their rebellion. But despite all the bloodshed and all the misery that each side had
exacted upon the other, and despite his absolute certainty in the rightness of the cause of
ending slavery, no Confederate soldier was to be punished, Lincoln ordered. They were to be
treated, as he put it, "liberally all round." What Lincoln wanted was for Confederate troops to
go back home and return to work on their farms and in their shops. He was even willing, he
said, to "let them have their horses to plow and their guns to shoot crows with."
That was the only way, Lincoln knew, to repair the rifts that had torn this country apart. It
was the only way to begin the healing that our nation so desperately needed. What Lincoln
never forgot, not even in the midst of civil war, was that despite all that divides us -- north
and south, black and white -- we were, at heart, one nation and one people, sharing a bond
as Americans that could bend but would not break.
And so even as we meet here today, in a moment when we are far less divided than in
Lincoln's day, but when we are once again debating the critical issues of our time -- and
debating them sometimes fiercely -- let us remember that we are doing so as servants of the
same flag, as representatives of the same people, and as stakeholders in a common future.
That is the most fitting tribute we can pay -- the most lasting monument we can build -- to
that most remarkable of men, Abraham Lincoln.
Thank you. 