We meet today at a transformational moment -- a moment in history when our interconnected
world presents us, at once, with great promise but also great peril.
Now, over the past four months my Administration has taken decisive steps to seize the
promise and confront these perils. We're working to recover from a global recession while
laying a new foundation for lasting prosperity. We're strengthening our armed forces as they
fight two wars, at the same time we're renewing American leadership to confront
unconventional challenges, from nuclear proliferation to terrorism, from climate change to
pandemic disease. And we're bringing to government -- and to this White House --
unprecedented transparency and accountability and new ways for Americans to participate in
their democracy.
But none of this progress would be possible, and none of these 21st century challenges can be
fully met, without America's digital infrastructure -- the backbone that underpins a prosperous
economy and a strong military and an open and efficient government. Without that foundation
we can't get the job done.
It's long been said that the revolutions in communications and information technology have
given birth to a virtual world. But make no mistake: This world -- cyberspace -- is a world that
we depend on every single day. It's our hardware and our software, our desktops and laptops
and cell phones and Blackberries that have become woven into every aspect of our lives.
It's the broadband networks beneath us and the wireless signals around us, the local networks
in our schools and hospitals and businesses, and the massive grids that power our nation. It's
the classified military and intelligence networks that keep us safe, and the World Wide Web
that has made us more interconnected than at any time in human history.
So cyberspace is real. And so are the risks that come with it.
It's the great irony of our Information Age -- the very technologies that empower us to create
and to build also empower those who would disrupt and destroy. And this paradox -- seen and
unseen -- is something that we experience every day.
It's about the privacy and the economic security of American families. We rely on the Internet
to pay our bills, to bank, to shop, to file our taxes. But we've had to learn a whole new
vocabulary just to stay ahead of the cyber criminals who would do us harm: spyware and
malware and spoofing and phishing and botnets. Millions of Americans have been victimized,
their privacy violated, their identities stolen, their lives upended, and their wallets
emptied. According to one survey, in the past two years alone cyber crime has cost Americans
more than 8 billion dollars.
I know how it feels to have privacy violated because it has happened to me and the people
around me. It's no secret that my presidential campaign harnessed the Internet and
technology to transform our politics. What isn't widely known is that during the general
election hackers managed to penetrate our computer systems. To all of you who donated to
our campaign, I want you to all rest assured, our fundraising website was untouched. So your
confidential personal and financial information was protected.
But between August and October, hackers gained access to emails and a range of campaign
files, from policy position papers to travel plans. And we worked closely with the CIA, with the
FBI and the Secret Service, and hired security consultants to restore the security of our
systems. It was a powerful reminder: In this Information Age, one of your greatest strengths
-- in our case, our ability to communicate to a wide range of supporters through the Internet -
- could also be one of your greatest vulnerabilities.
This is a matter, as well, of America's economic competitiveness. The small businesswoman in
St. Louis, the bond trader in the New York Stock Exchange, the workers at a global shipping
company in Memphis, the young entrepreneur in Silicon Valley -- they all need the networks
to make the next payroll, the next trade, the next delivery, the next great breakthrough. Ecommerce
alone last year accounted for some 132 billion dollars in retail sales.
But every day we see waves of cyber thieves trolling for sensitive information -- the
disgruntled employee on the inside, the lone hacker a thousand miles away, organized crime,
the industrial spy and, increasingly, foreign intelligence services. In one brazen act last year,
thieves used stolen credit card information to steal millions of dollars from 130 ATM machines
in 49 cities around the world -- and they did it in just 30 minutes.
A single employee of an American company was convicted of stealing intellectual property
reportedly worth 400 million dollars. It's been estimated that last year alone cyber criminals
stole intellectual property from businesses worldwide worth up to 1 trillion dollars.
In short, America's economic prosperity in the 21st century will depend on cybersecurity.
And this is also a matter of public safety and national security. We count on computer
networks to deliver our oil and gas, our power and our water. We rely on them for public
transportation and air traffic control. Yet we know that cyber intruders have probed our
electrical grid and that in other countries cyber attacks have plunged entire cities into
darkness.
Our technological advantage is a key to America's military dominance. But our defense and
military networks are under constant attack. Al Qaeda and other terrorist groups have spoken
of their desire to unleash a cyber attack on our country -- attacks that are harder to detect
and harder to defend against. Indeed, in today's world, acts of terror could come not only
from a few extremists in suicide vests but from a few key strokes on the computer -- a
weapon of mass disruption.
In one of the most serious cyber incidents to date against our military networks, several
thousand computers were infected last year by malicious software -- malware. And while no
sensitive information was compromised, our troops and defense personnel had to give up
those external memory devices -- thumb drives -- changing the way they used their
computers every day.
And last year we had a glimpse of the future face of war. As Russian tanks rolled into Georgia,
cyber attacks crippled Georgian government websites. The terrorists that sowed so much
death and destruction in Mumbai relied not only on guns and grenades but also on GPS and
phones using voice-over-the-Internet.
For all these reasons, it's now clear this cyber threat is one of the most serious economic and
national security challenges we face as a nation.
It's also clear that we're not as prepared as we should be, as a government or as a country.
In recent years, some progress has been made at the federal level. But just as we failed in the
past to invest in our physical infrastructure -- our roads, our bridges and rails -- we've failed
to invest in the security of our digital infrastructure.
No single official oversees cybersecurity policy across the federal government, and no single
agency has the responsibility or authority to match the scope and scale of the
challenge. Indeed, when it comes to cybersecurity, federal agencies have overlapping
missions and don't coordinate and communicate nearly as well as they should -- with each
other or with the private sector. We saw this in the disorganized response to Conficker, the
Internet worm that in recent months has infected millions of computers around the world.
This status quo is no longer acceptable -- not when there's so much at stake. We can and we
must do better.
And that's why shortly after taking office I directed my National Security Council and
Homeland Security Council to conduct a top-to-bottom review of the federal government's
efforts to defend our information and communications infrastructure and to recommend the
best way to ensure that these networks are able to secure our networks as well as our
prosperity.
Our review was open and transparent. I want to acknowledge, Melissa Hathaway -- who is
here -- who is the Acting Senior Director for Cyberspace on our National Security Council, who
led the review team, as well as the Center for Strategic and International Studies bipartisan
Commission on Cybersecurity, and all who were part of our 60-day review team. They listened
to a wide variety of groups, many of which are represented here today and I want to thank for
their input: industry and academia, civil liberties and private -- privacy advocates. We listened
to every level and branch of government -- from local to state to federal, civilian, military,
homeland as well as intelligence, Congress and international partners, as well. I consulted
with my national security teams, my homeland security teams, and my economic advisors.
Today I'm releasing a report on our review, and can announce that my Administration will
pursue a new comprehensive approach to securing America's digital infrastructure.
This new approach starts at the top, with this commitment from me: From now on, our digital
infrastructure -- the networks and computers we depend on every day -- will be treated as
they should be: as a strategic national asset. Protecting this infrastructure will be a national
security priority. We will ensure that these networks are secure, trustworthy and resilient. We
will deter, prevent, detect, and defend against attacks and recover quickly from any
disruptions or damage.
To give these efforts the high-level focus and attention they deserve -- and as part of the
new, single National Security Staff announced this week -- I'm creating a new office here at
the White House that will be led by the Cybersecurity Coordinator. Because of the critical
importance of this work, I will personally select this official. I'll depend on this official in all
matters relating to cybersecurity, and this official will have my full support and regular access
to me as we confront these challenges.
Today, I want to focus on the important responsibilities this office will fulfill: orchestrating and
integrating all cybersecurity policies for the government; working closely with the Office of
Management and Budget to ensure agency budgets reflect those priorities; and, in the event
of major cyber incident or attack, coordinating our response.
To ensure that federal cyber policies enhance our security and our prosperity, my
Cybersecurity Coordinator will be a member of the National Security Staff as well as the staff
of my National Economic Council. 
To ensure that policies keep faith with our fundamental values, this office will also include an
official with a portfolio specifically dedicated to safeguarding the privacy and civil liberties of
the American people.
There's much work to be done, and the report we're releasing today outlines a range of
actions that we will pursue in five key areas.
First, working in partnership with the communities represented here today, we will develop a
new comprehensive strategy to secure America's information and communications networks.
To ensure a coordinated approach across government, my Cybersecurity Coordinator will work
closely with my Chief Technology Officer, Aneesh Chopra, and my Chief Information Officer,
Vivek Kundra. To ensure accountability in federal agencies, cybersecurity will be designated as
one of my key management priorities. Clear milestones and performances metrics will
measure progress. And as we develop our strategy, we will be open and transparent, which is
why you'll find today's report and a wealth of related information on our Web site,
www.whitehouse.gov.
Second, we will work with all the key players -- including state and local governments and the
private sector -- to ensure an organized and unified response to future cyber incidents. Given
the enormous damage that can be caused by even a single cyber attack, ad hoc responses will
not do. Nor is it sufficient to simply strengthen our defenses after incidents or attacks
occur. Just as we do for natural disasters, we have to have plans and resources in place
beforehand -- sharing information, issuing warnings and ensuring a coordinated response.
Third, we will strengthen the public/private partnerships that are critical to this endeavor. The
vast majority of our critical information infrastructure in the United States is owned and
operated by the private sector. So let me be very clear: My Administration will not dictate
security standards for private companies. On the contrary, we will collaborate with industry to
find technology solutions that ensure our security and promote prosperity.
Fourth, we will continue to invest in the cutting-edge research and development necessary for
the innovation and discovery we need to meet the digital challenges of our time. And that's
why my Administration is making major investments in our information infrastructure: laying
broadband lines to every corner of America; building a smart electric grid to deliver energy
more efficiently; pursuing a next generation of air traffic control systems; and moving to
electronic health records, with privacy protections, to reduce costs and save lives.
And finally, we will begin a national campaign to promote cybersecurity awareness and digital
literacy from our boardrooms to our classrooms, and to build a digital workforce for the 21st
century. And that's why we're making a new commitment to education in math and science,
and historic investments in science and research and development. Because it's not enough
for our children and students to master today's technologies -- social networking and emailing
and texting and blogging -- we need them to pioneer the technologies that will allow 
us to work effectively through these new media and allow us to prosper in the future. So
these are the things we will do.
Let me also be clear about what we will not do. Our pursuit of cybersecurity will not -- I
repeat, will not include -- monitoring private sector networks or Internet traffic.
We will preserve and protect the personal privacy and civil liberties that we cherish as
Americans. Indeed, I remain firmly committed to net neutrality so we can keep the Internet as
it should be -- open and free.
The task I have described will not be easy. Some 1.5 billion people around the world are
already online, and more are logging on every day. Groups and governments are sharpening
their cyber capabilities. Protecting our prosperity and security in this globalized world is going
to be a long, difficult struggle demanding patience and persistence over many years.
But we need to remember: We're only at the beginning. The epochs of history are long -- the
Agricultural Revolution; the Industrial Revolution. By comparison, our Information Age is still
in its infancy. We're only at Web 2.0. Now our virtual world is going viral. And we've only just
begun to explore the next generation of technologies that will transform our lives in ways we
can't even begin to imagine.
So a new world awaits -- a world of greater security and greater potential prosperity -- if we
reach for it, if we lead. So long as I'm President of the United States, we will do just that. And
the United States -- the nation that invented the Internet, that launched an information
revolution, that transformed the world -- will do what we did in the 20th century and lead
once more in the 21st.
Thank you very much, everybody.
Thank you.
Thank you so much. Good afternoon. I am honored to be in the timeless city of Cairo, and to
be hosted by two remarkable institutions. For over a thousand years, Al-Azhar has stood as a
beacon of Islamic learning; and for over a century, Cairo University has been a source of
Egypt's advancement. And together, you represent the harmony between tradition and
progress. I'm grateful for your hospitality and the hospitality of the people of Egypt. And I'm
also proud to carry with me the goodwill of the American people, and a greeting of peace from
Muslim communities in my country: Assalaamu alaykum [Peace be upon you].
We meet at a time of great tension between the United States and Muslims around the world,
tension rooted in historical forces that go beyond any current policy debate. The relationship
between Islam and the West includes centuries of coexistence and cooperation, but also
conflict and religious wars. More recently, tension has been fed by colonialism that denied
rights and opportunities to many Muslims, and a Cold War in which Muslim-majority countries
were too often treated as proxies without regard to their own aspirations. Moreover, the
sweeping change brought by modernity and globalization led many Muslims to view the West
as hostile to the traditions of Islam.
Violent extremists have exploited these tensions in a small but potent minority of
Muslims. The attacks of September 11, 2001 and the continued efforts of these extremists to
engage in violence against civilians has led some in my country to view Islam as inevitably
hostile not only to America and Western countries, but also to human rights. All this has bred
more fear and more mistrust.
So long as our relationship is defined by our differences, we will empower those who sow
hatred rather than peace, those who promote conflict rather than the cooperation that can
help all of our people achieve justice and prosperity. And this cycle of suspicion and discord
must end.
I've come here to Cairo to seek a new beginning between the United States and Muslims
around the world, one based on mutual interest and mutual respect, and one based upon the
truth that America and Islam are not exclusive and need not be in competition. Instead, they
overlap and share common principles -- principles of justice and progress, tolerance and the
dignity of all human beings.
I do so recognizing that change cannot happen overnight. I know there's been a lot of
publicity about this speech, but no single speech can eradicate years of mistrust, nor can I
answer in the time that I have this afternoon all the complex questions that brought us to this
point. But I am convinced that in order to move forward, we must say openly to each other
the things we hold in our hearts and that too often are said only behind closed doors. There
must be a sustained effort to listen to each other, to learn from each other, to respect one
another, and to seek common ground. As the Holy Qur’an tells us, "Be conscious of God and
speak always the truth." That is what I will try to do today -- to speak the truth as best I can,
humbled by the task before us, and firm in my belief that the interests we share as human
beings are far more powerful than the forces that drive us apart.
Now part of this conviction is rooted in my own experience. I'm a Christian, but my father
came from a Kenyan family that includes generations of Muslims. As a boy, I spent several
years in Indonesia and heard the call of the azaan at the break of dawn and at the fall of
dusk. As a young man, I worked in Chicago communities where many found dignity and
peace in their Muslim faith.
As a student of history, I also know civilization's debt to Islam. It was Islam -- at places like
Al-Azhar -- that carried the light of learning through so many centuries, paving the way for
Europe's Renaissance and Enlightenment. It was innovation in Muslim communities that
developed the order of algebra, our magnetic compass and tools of navigation, our mastery of
pens and printing, our understanding of how disease spreads and how it can be
healed. Islamic culture has given us majestic arches and soaring spires; timeless poetry and
cherished music; elegant calligraphy and places of peaceful contemplation. And throughout
history, Islam has demonstrated through words and deeds the possibilities of religious
tolerance and racial equality.
I also know that Islam has always been a part of America's story. The first nation to recognize
my country was Morocco. In signing the Treaty of Tripoli in 1796, our second President, John
Adams, wrote, "The United States has in itself no character of enmity against the laws,
religion, or tranquility of Muslims." And since our founding, American Muslims have enriched
the United States.
They have fought in our wars; they have served in our government; they have stood for civil
rights; they have started businesses; they have taught at our universities; they've excelled in
our sports arenas; they've won Nobel Prizes, built our tallest building, and lit the Olympic
Torch. And when the first Muslim American was recently elected to Congress, he took the
oath to defend our Constitution using the same Holy Qur’an that one of our Founding Fathers -
- Thomas Jefferson -- kept in his personal library.
So I have known Islam on three continents before coming to the region where it was first
revealed. That experience guides my conviction that partnership between America and Islam
must be based on what Islam is, not what it isn't. And I consider it part of my responsibility as
President of the United States to fight against negative stereotypes of Islam wherever they
appear.
But, that same principle must apply to Muslim perceptions of America. Just as Muslims do not
fit a crude stereotype, America is not the crude stereotype of a self-interested empire. The
United States has been one of the greatest sources of progress that the world has ever
known. We were born out of revolution against an empire. We were founded upon the ideal
that all are created equal. And we have shed blood and struggled for centuries to give
meaning to those words -- within our borders and around the world. We are shaped by every
culture, drawn from every end of the Earth, and dedicated to a simple concept: E pluribus
unum -- "Out of many, one."
Now much has been made of the fact that an African American with the name Barack Hussein
Obama could be elected President. But my personal story is not so unique. The dream of
opportunity for all people has not come true for everyone in America, but its promise exists
for all who come to our shores -- and that includes nearly 7 million American Muslims in our
country today who, by the way, enjoy incomes and educational levels that are higher than the
American average.
Moreover, freedom in America is indivisible from the freedom to practice one's religion. That is
why there is a mosque in every state in our union, and over 1200 mosques within our
borders. That's why the United States government has gone to court to protect the right of
women and girls to wear the hijab -- and to punish those who would deny it.
So let there be no doubt: Islam is a part of America. And I believe that America holds within
her the truth that regardless of race, religion, or station in life, all of us share common
aspirations -- to live in peace and security; to get an education and to work with dignity; to
love our families, our communities, and our God. These things we share. This is the hope of
all humanity.
Of course, recognizing our common humanity is only the beginning of our task. Words alone
cannot meet the needs of our people. These needs will be met only if we act boldly in the
years ahead, and if we understand that the challenges we face are shared and our failure to
meet them will hurt us all.
For we have learned from recent experience that when a financial system weakens in one
country, prosperity is hurt everywhere. When a new flu infects one human being, all are at
risk. When one nation pursues a nuclear weapon, the risk of nuclear attack rises for all
nations. When violent extremists operate in one stretch of mountains, people are endangered
across an ocean. When innocents in Bosnia and Darfur are slaughtered, that is a stain on our
collective conscience. That is what it means to share this world in the 21st century. That is the
responsibility we have to one another as human beings.
And this is a difficult responsibility to embrace. For human history has often been a record of
nations and tribes -- and, yes, religions -- subjugating one another in pursuit of their own
interests. Yet in this new age, such attitudes are self-defeating. Given our interdependence,
any world order that elevates one nation or group of people over another will inevitably
fail. So whatever we think of the past, we must not be prisoners to it. Our problems must be
dealt with through partnership; our progress must be shared. Now, that does not mean we
should ignore sources of tension. Indeed, it suggests the opposite: We must face these
tensions squarely. And so in that spirit, let me speak as clearly and as plainly as I can about
some specific issues that I believe we must finally confront together.
The first issue that we have to confront is violent extremism in all of its forms.
In Ankara, I made clear that America is not -- and never will be -- at war with Islam. We will,
however, relentlessly confront violent extremists who pose a grave threat to our security --
because we reject the same thing that people of all faiths reject: the killing of innocent men,
women, and children. And it is my first duty as President to protect the American people.
The situation in Afghanistan demonstrates America's goals, and our need to work
together. Over seven years ago, the United States pursued al Qaeda and the Taliban with
broad international support. We did not go by choice; we went because of necessity. I'm
aware that there's still some who would question or even justify the events of 9/11. But let us
be clear: Al Qaeda killed nearly 3,000 people on that day. The victims were innocent men,
women, and children from America and many other nations who had done nothing to harm
anybody. And yet al Qaeda chose to ruthlessly murder these people, claimed credit for the
attack, and even now states their determination to kill on a massive scale. They have affiliates
in many countries and are trying to expand their reach. These are not opinions to be debated;
these are facts to be dealt with.
Now, make no mistake: We do not want to keep our troops in Afghanistan. We seek no
military bases there. It is agonizing for America to lose our young men and women. It is
costly and politically difficult to continue this conflict. We would gladly bring every single one
of our troops home if we could be confident that there were not violent extremists in
Afghanistan and now Pakistan determined to kill as many Americans as they possibly can. But
that is not yet the case.
And that's why we're partnering with a coalition of 46 countries. And despite the costs
involved, America's commitment will not weaken. Indeed, none of us should tolerate these
extremists. They have killed in many countries. They have killed people of different faiths.
But more than any other, they have killed Muslims. Their actions are irreconcilable with the
rights of human beings, the progress of nations, and with Islam. The Qur’an teaches that
whoever kills an innocent, it is as if he has killed all mankind. And the Holy Qur’an also says
“Whoever saves a person, it is as if he has saved all mankind.” The enduring faith of over a
billion people is so much bigger than the narrow hatred of a few. Islam is not part of the
problem in combating violent extremism -- it is an important part of promoting peace.
Now, we also know that military power alone is not going to solve the problems in Afghanistan
and Pakistan. That's why we plan to invest 1.5 billion dollars each year over the next five
years to partner with Pakistanis to build schools and hospitals, roads and businesses, and
hundreds of millions to help those who've been displaced. That's why we are providing more
than 2.8 billion dollars to help Afghans develop their economy and deliver services that people
depend on.
Let me also address the issue of Iraq. Unlike Afghanistan, Iraq was a war of choice that
provoked strong differences in my country and around the world. Although I believe that the
Iraqi people are ultimately better off without the tyranny of Saddam Hussein, I also believe
that events in Iraq have reminded America of the need to use diplomacy and build
international consensus to resolve our problems whenever possible. Indeed, we can recall the
words of Thomas Jefferson, who said: "I hope that our wisdom will grow with our power, and
teach us that the less we use our power the greater it will be."
Today, America has a dual responsibility: to help Iraq forge a better future; and to leave Iraq
to Iraqis. And I have made it clear to the Iraqi people that we pursue no bases, and no claim
on their territory or resources. Iraq's sovereignty is its own. And that's why I ordered the
removal of our combat brigades by next August. That is why we will honor our agreement with
Iraq's democratically elected government to remove combat troops from Iraqi cities by July,
and to remove all of our troops from Iraq by 2012. We will help Iraq train its security forces
and develop its economy. But we will support a secure and united Iraq as a partner, and never
as a patron.
And finally, just as America can never tolerate violence by extremists, we must never alter or
forget our principles. Nine-eleven was an enormous trauma to our country. The fear and
anger that it provoked was understandable, but in some cases it led us to act contrary to our
traditions and our ideals. We are taking concrete actions to change course. I have
unequivocally prohibited the use of torture by the United States, and I have ordered the
prison at Guantanamo Bay closed by early next year. So America will defend itself, respectful
of the sovereignty of nations and the rule of law. And we will do so in partnership with Muslim
communities which are also threatened. The sooner the extremists are isolated and
unwelcome in Muslim communities, the sooner we will all be safer.
The second major source of tension that we need to discuss is the situation between Israelis,
Palestinians, and the Arab world.
America's strong bonds with Israel are well known. This bond is unbreakable. It is based upon
cultural and historical ties, and the recognition that the aspiration for a Jewish homeland is
rooted in a tragic history that cannot be denied.
Around the world, the Jewish people were persecuted for centuries, and anti-Semitism in
Europe culminated in an unprecedented Holocaust. Tomorrow, I will visit Buchenwald, which
was part of a network of camps where Jews were enslaved, tortured, shot, and gassed to
death by the Third Reich. Six million Jews were killed -- more than the entire Jewish
population of Israel today. Denying that fact is baseless; it is ignorant; and it is
hateful. Threatening Israel with destruction, or repeating vile stereotypes about Jews, is
deeply wrong and only serves to evoke in the minds of Israelis this most painful of memories
while preventing the peace that the people of this region deserve.
On the other hand, it is also undeniable that the Palestinian people -- Muslims and Christians -
- has suffered in pursuit of a homeland. For more than 60 years they've endured the pain of
dislocation. Many wait in refugee camps in the West Bank, Gaza, and neighboring lands for a
life of peace and security that they have never been able to lead. They endure the daily
humiliations -- large and small -- that come with occupation. So let there be no doubt: The
situation for the Palestinian people is intolerable. And America will not turn our backs on the
legitimate Palestinian aspiration for dignity, opportunity, and a state of their own.
For decades then, there has been a stalemate: two peoples with legitimate aspirations, each
with a painful history that makes compromise elusive. It's easy to point fingers -- for
Palestinians to point to the displacement brought about by Israel's founding, and for Israelis
to point to the constant hostility and attacks throughout its history from within its borders as
well as beyond. But if we see this conflict only from one side or the other, then we will be
blind to the truth: The only resolution is for the aspirations of both sides to be met through
two states, where Israelis and Palestinians each live in peace and security.
That is in Israel's interest, Palestine's interest, America's interest, and the world's interest.
And that is why I intend to personally pursue this outcome with all the patience and dedication
that the task requires. The obligations that the parties have agreed to under the road map are
clear. For peace to come, it is time for them -- and all of us -- to live up to our responsibilities.
Palestinians must abandon violence. Resistance through violence and killing is wrong and it
does not succeed. For centuries, black people in America suffered the lash of the whip as
slaves and the humiliation of segregation. But it was not violence that won full and equal
rights. It was a peaceful and determined insistence upon the ideals at the center of America's
founding.
This same story can be told by people from South Africa to South Asia; from Eastern Europe
to Indonesia. It's a story with a simple truth: Violence is a dead end. It is a sign neither of
courage nor power to shoot rockets at sleeping children, or to blow up old women on a
bus. That's not how moral authority is claimed; that's how it is surrendered.
Now is the time for Palestinians to focus on what they can build. The Palestinian Authority
must develop its capacity to govern, with institutions that serve the needs of its peoples.
Hamas does have support among some Palestinians, but they also have to recognize they
have responsibilities. To play a role in fulfilling Palestinian aspirations, to unify the Palestinian
people, Hamas must put an end to violence, recognize past agreements, recognize Israel's
right to exist.
At the same time, Israelis must acknowledge that just as Israel's right to exist cannot be
denied, neither can Palestine's. The United States does not accept the legitimacy of continued
Israeli settlements. This construction violates previous agreements and undermines efforts to
achieve peace. It is time for these settlements to stop.
And Israel must also live up to its obligation to ensure that Palestinians can live and work and
develop their society. Just as it devastates Palestinian families, the continuing humanitarian
crisis in Gaza does not serve Israel's security; neither does the continuing lack of opportunity
in the West Bank. Progress in the daily lives of the Palestinian people must be a critical part of
a road to peace, and Israel must take concrete steps to enable such progress.
And finally, the Arab states must recognize that the Arab Peace Initiative was an important
beginning, but not the end of their responsibilities. The Arab-Israeli conflict should no longer
be used to distract the people of Arab nations from other problems. Instead, it must be a
cause for action to help the Palestinian people develop the institutions that will sustain their
state, to recognize Israel's legitimacy, and to choose progress over a self-defeating focus on
the past.
America will align our policies with those who pursue peace, and we will say in public what we
say in private to Israelis and Palestinians and Arabs. We cannot impose peace. But privately,
many Muslims recognize that Israel will not go away. Likewise, many Israelis recognize the
need for a Palestinian state. It is time for us to act on what everyone knows to be true.
Too many tears have been shed. Too much blood has been shed. All of us have a
responsibility to work for the day when the mothers of Israelis and Palestinians can see their
children grow up without fear; when the Holy Land of the three great faiths is the place of
peace that God intended it to be; when Jerusalem is a secure and lasting home for Jews and
Christians and Muslims, and a place for all of the children of Abraham to mingle peacefully
together as in the story of Isra, when Moses, Jesus, and Mohammed, peace be upon them,
joined in prayer.
The third source of tension is our shared interest in the rights and responsibilities of nations
on nuclear weapons.
This issue has been a source of tension between the United States and the Islamic Republic of
Iran. For many years, Iran has defined itself in part by its opposition to my country, and there
is in fact a tumultuous history between us. In the middle of the Cold War, the United States
played a role in the overthrow of a democratically elected Iranian government. Since the
Islamic Revolution, Iran has played a role in acts of hostage-taking and violence against U.S.
troops and civilians. This history is well known. Rather than remain trapped in the past, I've
made it clear to Iran's leaders and people that my country is prepared to move forward. The
question now is not what Iran is against, but rather what future it wants to build.
I recognize it will be hard to overcome decades of mistrust, but we will proceed with courage,
rectitude, and resolve. There will be many issues to discuss between our two countries, and
we are willing to move forward without preconditions on the basis of mutual respect. But it is
clear to all concerned that when it comes to nuclear weapons, we have reached a decisive
point. This is not simply about America's interests. It's about preventing a nuclear arms race
in the Middle East that could lead this region and the world down a hugely dangerous path.
I understand those who protest that some countries have weapons that others do not. No
single nation should pick and choose which nation holds nuclear weapons. And that's why I
strongly reaffirmed America's commitment to seek a world in which no nations hold nuclear
weapons. And any nation -- including Iran -- should have the right to access peaceful nuclear
power if it complies with its responsibilities under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. That
commitment is at the core of the treaty, and it must be kept for all who fully abide by it. And I
am hopeful that all countries in the region can share in this goal.
The fourth issue that I will address is democracy.
I know there has been controversy about the promotion of democracy in recent years, and
much of this controversy is connected to the war in Iraq. So let me be clear: No system of
government can or should be imposed by one nation by any other.
That does not lessen my commitment, however, to governments that reflect the will of the
people. Each nation gives life to this principle in its own way, grounded in the traditions of its
own people. America does not presume to know what is best for everyone, just as we would
not presume to pick the outcome of a peaceful election. But I do have an unyielding belief that
all people yearn for certain things: the ability to speak your mind and have a say in how you
are governed; confidence in the rule of law and the equal administration of justice;
government that is transparent and doesn't steal from the people; the freedom to live as you
choose. These are not just American ideas; they are human rights. And that is why we will
support them everywhere.
Now, there is no straight line to realize this promise. But this much is clear: Governments that
protect these rights are ultimately more stable, successful, and secure. Suppressing ideas
never succeeds in making them go away. America respects the right of all peaceful and lawabiding
voices to be heard around the world, even if we disagree with them. And we will
welcome all elected, peaceful governments -- provided they govern with respect for all their
people.
This last point is important because there are some who advocate for democracy only when
they're out of power. Once in power, they are ruthless in suppressing the rights of others. So
no matter where it takes hold, government of the people and by the people sets a single
standard for all who would hold power: You must maintain your power through consent, not
coercion; you must respect the rights of minorities, and participate with a spirit of tolerance
and compromise; you must place the interests of your people and the legitimate workings of
the political process above your party. Without these ingredients, elections alone do not make
true democracy.
Thank you. The fifth issue that we must address together is religious freedom.
Islam has a proud tradition of tolerance. We see it in the history of Andalusia and Cordoba
during the Inquisition. I saw it firsthand as a child in Indonesia, where devout Christians
worshiped freely in an overwhelmingly Muslim country. That is the spirit we need today.
People in every country should be free to choose and live their faith based upon the
persuasion of the mind and the heart and the soul. This tolerance is essential for religion to
thrive, but it's being challenged in many different ways.
Among some Muslims, there's a disturbing tendency to measure one's own faith by the
rejection of somebody else's faith. The richness of religious diversity must be upheld --
whether it is for Maronites in Lebanon or the Copts in Egypt. And if we are being honest, fault
lines must be closed among Muslims, as well, as the divisions between Sunni and Shia have
led to tragic violence, particularly in Iraq.
Freedom of religion is central to the ability of peoples to live together. We must always
examine the ways in which we protect it. For instance, in the United States, rules on
charitable giving have made it harder for Muslims to fulfill their religious obligation. That's why
I'm committed to working with American Muslims to ensure that they can fulfill zakat.
Likewise, it is important for Western countries to avoid impeding Muslim citizens from
practicing religion as they see fit -- for instance, by dictating what clothes a Muslim woman
should wear.
We can't disguise hostility towards any religion behind the pretence of liberalism. 
In fact, faith should bring us together. And that's why we're forging service projects in
America to bring together Christians, Muslims, and Jews. That's why we welcome efforts like
Saudi Arabian King Abdullah's interfaith dialogue and Turkey's leadership in the Alliance of
Civilizations. Around the world, we can turn dialogue into interfaith service, so bridges
between peoples lead to action -- whether it is combating malaria in Africa, or providing relief
after a natural disaster.
The sixth issue that I want to address is women's rights.
I know, and you can tell from this audience, that there is a healthy debate about this issue. I
reject the view of some in the West that a woman who chooses to cover her hair is somehow
less equal, but I do believe that a woman who is denied an education is denied equality. And it
is no coincidence that countries where women are well educated are far more likely to be
prosperous. Now, let me be clear: Issues of women's equality are by no means simply an
issue for Islam. In Turkey, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Indonesia, we've seen Muslim-majority
countries elect a woman to lead. Meanwhile, the struggle for women's equality continues in
many aspects of American life, and in countries around the world.
I am convinced that our daughters can contribute just as much to society as our sons. Our
common prosperity will be advanced by allowing all humanity -- men and women -- to reach
their full potential. I do not believe that women must make the same choices as men in order
to be equal, and I respect those women who choose to live their lives in traditional roles. But
it should be their choice. And that is why the United States will partner with any Muslimmajority
country to support expanded literacy for girls, and to help young women pursue
employment through micro-financing that helps people live their dreams.
Finally, I want to discuss economic development and opportunity.
I know that for many, the face of globalization is contradictory. The Internet and television
can bring knowledge and information, but also offensive sexuality and mindless violence into
the home. Trade can bring new wealth and opportunities, but also huge disruptions and
change in communities. In all nations -- including America -- this change can bring fear; fear
that because of modernity we lose control over our economic choices, our politics, and most
importantly our identities -- those things we most cherish about our communities, our
families, our traditions, and our faith.
But I also know that human progress cannot be denied. There need not be contradictions
between development and tradition. Countries like Japan and South Korea grew their
economies enormously while maintaining distinct cultures. The same is true for the
astonishing progress within Muslim-majority countries from Kuala Lumpur to Dubai. In ancient
times and in our times, Muslim communities have been at the forefront of innovation and
education.
And this is important because no development strategy can be based only upon what comes
out of the ground, nor can it be sustained while young people are out of work. Many Gulf
states have enjoyed great wealth as a consequence of oil, and some are beginning to focus it
on broader development. But all of us must recognize that education and innovation will be
the currency of the 21st century, and in too many Muslim communities there remains
underinvestment in these areas. I'm emphasizing such investment within my own
country. And while America in the past has focused on oil and gas when it comes to this part
of the world, we now seek a broader engagement.
On education, we will expand exchange programs, and increase scholarships, like the one that
brought my father to America. At the same time, we will encourage more Americans to study
in Muslim communities. And we will match promising Muslim students with internships in
America, invest in online learning for teachers and children around the world, and create a
new online network, so a young person in Kansas can communicate instantly with a young
person in Cairo.
On economic development, we will create a new corps of business volunteers to partner with
counterparts in Muslim-majority countries. And I will host a summit on entrepreneurship this
year to identify how we can deepen ties between business leaders, foundations, and social
entrepreneurs in the United States and Muslim communities around the world.
On science and technology, we will launch a new fund to support technological development in
Muslim-majority countries, and to help transfer ideas to the marketplace so they can create
more jobs. We'll open centers of scientific excellence in Africa, the Middle East and Southeast
Asia, and appoint new science envoys to collaborate on programs that develop new sources of
energy, create green jobs, digitize records, clean water, grow new crops. Today I'm
announcing a new global effort with the Organization of the Islamic Conference to eradicate
polio. And we will also expand partnerships with Muslim communities to promote child and
maternal health.
All these things must be done in partnership. Americans are ready to join with citizens and
governments; community organizations, religious leaders, and businesses in Muslim
communities around the world to help our people pursue a better life.
Now the issues that I have described will not be easy to address. But we have a responsibility
to join together on behalf of the world that we seek -- a world where extremists no longer
threaten our people, and American troops have come home; a world where Israelis and
Palestinians are each secure in a state of their own, and nuclear energy is used for peaceful
purposes; a world where governments serve their citizens, and the rights of all God's children
are respected. Those are mutual interests. That is the world we seek. But we can only achieve
it together.
I know there are many, Muslim and non-Muslim, who question whether we can forge this new
beginning. Some are eager to stoke the flames of division, and to stand in the way of
progress. Some suggest that it isn't worth the effort -- that we are fated to disagree, and
civilizations are doomed to clash. Many more are simply skeptical that real change can
occur. There's so much fear, so much mistrust that has built up over the years. But if we
choose to be bound by the past, we will never move forward.
And I want to particularly say this to young people of every faith, in every country: You, more
than anyone, have the ability to reimagine the world, to remake this world. All of us share this
world for but a brief moment in time. The question is whether we spend that time focused on
what pushes us apart, or whether we commit ourselves to an effort -- a sustained effort -- to
find common ground, to focus on the future we seek for our children, and to respect the
dignity of all human beings.
It's easier to start wars than to end them. It's easier to blame others than to look inward. It's
easier to see what is different about someone than to find the things we share. But we should
choose the right path, not just the easy path. There's one rule that lies at the heart of every
religion -- that we do unto others as we would have them do unto us. This truth transcends
nations and peoples -- a belief that isn't new; that isn't black or white or brown; that isn't
Christian or Muslim or Jew. It's a belief that pulsed in the cradle of civilization, and that still
beats in the hearts of billions around the world. It's a faith in other people, and it's what
brought me here today.
We have the power to make the world we seek, but only if we have the courage to make a
new beginning, keeping in mind what has been written.
The Holy Qur’an tells us: "O mankind! We have created you male and a female; and we have
made you into nations and tribes so that you may know one another."
The Talmud tells us: "The whole of the Torah is for the purpose of promoting peace."
The Holy Bible tells us: "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called sons of God."
The people of the world can live together in peace. We know that is God's vision. Now that
must be our work here on Earth.
Thank you. And may God's peace be upon you. Thank you very much. Thank you.