Chancellor Merkel and I have just finished our tour here at Buchenwald. I want to thank Dr. Volkhard
Knigge, who gave an outstanding account of what we were witnessing. I am particularly grateful to be
accompanied by my friend Elie Wiesel, as well as Mr. Bertrand Herz, both of whom are survivors of this
place.
We saw the area known as Little Camp where Elie and Bertrand were sent as boys. In fact, at the place that
commemorates this camp, there is a photograph in which we can see a 16-year-old Elie in one of the bunks
along with the others. We saw the ovens of the crematorium, the guard towers, the barbed wire fences, the
foundations of barracks that once held people in the most unimaginable conditions.
We saw the memorial to all the survivors -- a steel plate, as Chancellor Merkel said, that is heated to 37
degrees Celsius, the temperature of the human body; a reminder -- where people were deemed inhuman
because of their differences -- of the mark that we all share.
Now these sights have not lost their horror with the passage of time. As we were walking up, Elie said, "if
these trees could talk." And there's a certain irony about the beauty of the landscape and the horror that
took place here.
More than half a century later, our grief and our outrage over what happened have not diminished. I will not
forget what I've seen here today.
I've known about this place since I was a boy, hearing stories about my great uncle, who was a very young
man serving in World War II. He was part of the 89th Infantry Division, the first Americans to reach a
concentration camp. They liberated Ohrdruf, one of Buchenwald's sub-camps.
And I told this story, he returned from his service in a state of shock saying little and isolating himself for
months on end from family and friends, alone with the painful memories that would not leave his head. And
as we see -- as we saw some of the images here, it's understandable that someone who witnessed what
had taken place here would be in a state of shock.
My great uncle's commander, General Eisenhower, understood this impulse to silence. He had seen the
piles of bodies and starving survivors and deplorable conditions that the American soldiers found when they
arrived, and he knew that those who witnessed these things might be too stunned to speak about them or
be able -- be unable to find the words to describe them; that they might be rendered mute in the way my
great uncle had. And he knew that what had happened here was so unthinkable that after the bodies had
been taken away, that perhaps no one would believe it.
And that's why he ordered American troops and Germans from the nearby town to tour the camp. He invited
congressmen and journalists to bear witness and ordered photographs and films to be made. And he
insisted on viewing every corner of these camps so that -- and I quote -- he could "be in a position to give
first-hand evidence of these things if ever in the future there develops a tendency to charge these
allegations merely to propaganda."
We are here today because we know this work is not yet finished. To this day, there are those who insist
that the Holocaust never happened -- a denial of fact and truth that is baseless and ignorant and hateful.
This place is the ultimate rebuke to such thoughts; a reminder of our duty to confront those who would tell
lies about our history.
Also to this day, there are those who perpetuate every form of intolerance -- racism, anti-Semitism,
homophobia, xenophobia, sexism, and more -- hatred that degrades its victims and diminishes us all. In this
century, we've seen genocide. We've seen mass graves and the ashes of villages burned to the ground;
children used as soldiers and rape used as a weapon of war. This places teaches us that we must be ever
vigilant about the spread of evil in our own time, that we must reject the false comfort that others' suffering is
not our problem and commit ourselves to resisting those who would subjugate others to serve their own
interests.
But as we reflect today on the human capacity for evil and our shared obligation to defy it, we're also
reminded of the human capacity for good. For amidst the countless acts of cruelty that took place here, we
know that there were many acts of courage and kindness, as well. The Jews who insisted on fasting on Yom
Kippur. The camp cook who hid potatoes in the lining of his prison uniform and distributed them to his fellow
inmates, risking his own life to help save theirs. The prisoners who organized a special effort to protect the
children here, sheltering them from work and giving them extra food. They set up secret classrooms, some
of the inmates, and taught history and math and urged the children to think about their future professions.
And we were just hearing about the resistance that formed and the irony that the base for the resistance
was in the latrine areas because the guards found it so offensive that they wouldn't go there. And so out of
the filth, that became a space in which small freedoms could thrive.
When the American GIs arrived they were astonished to find more than 900 children still alive, and the
youngest was just three years old. And I'm told that a couple of the prisoners even wrote a Buchenwald
song that many here sang. 
Among the lyrics were these: "...whatever our fate, we will say yes to life, for the day will come when we are
free...in our blood we carry the will to live and in our hearts, in our hearts -- faith."
These individuals never could have known the world would one day speak of this place. They could not
have known that some of them would live to have children and grandchildren who would grow up hearing
their stories and would return here so many years later to find a museum and memorials and the clock tower
set permanently to 3:15, the moment of liberation.
They could not have known how the nation of Israel would rise out of the destruction of the Holocaust and
the strong, enduring bonds between that great nation and my own. And they could not have known that one
day an American President would visit this place and speak of them and that he would do so standing side
by side with the German Chancellor in a Germany that is now a vibrant democracy and a valued American
ally.
They could not have known these things. But still surrounded by death they willed themselves to hold fast to
life. In their hearts they still had faith that evil would not triumph in the end, that while history is unknowable
it arches towards progress, and that the world would one day remember them. And it is now up to us, the
living, in our work, wherever we are, to resist injustice and intolerance and indifference in whatever forms
they may take, and ensure that those who were lost here did not go in vain. It is up to us to redeem that
faith. It is up to us to bear witness; to ensure that the world continues to note what happened here; to
remember all those who survived and all those who perished, and to remember them not just as victims, but
also as individuals who hoped and loved and dreamed just like us.
And just as we identify with the victims, it's also important for us I think to remember that the perpetrators of
such evil were human, as well, and that we have to guard against cruelty in ourselves. And I want to
express particular thanks to Chancellor Merkel and the German people, because it's not easy to look into
the past in this way and acknowledge it and make something of it, make a determination that they will stand
guard against acts like this happening again.
Rather than have me end with my remarks I thought it was appropriate to have Elie Wiesel provide some
reflection and some thought as he returns here so many years later to the place where his father died.
Good afternoon. Thank you, President Sarkozy, Prime Minister Brown, Prime Minister Harper,
and Prince Charles for being here today. Thank you to our Secretary of Veterans Affairs,
General Eric Shinseki, for making the trip out here to join us. Thanks also to Susan
Eisenhower, whose grandfather began this mission 65 years ago with a simple charge: "Ok,
let's go." And to a World War II veteran who returned home from this war to serve a proud
and distinguished career as a United States Senator and a national leader: Bob Dole.
I'm not the first American President to come and mark this anniversary, and I likely will not be
the last. This is an event that has long brought to this coast both heads of state and grateful
citizens; veterans and their loved ones; the liberated and their liberators. It's been written
about and spoken of and depicted in countless books and films and speeches. And long after
our time on this Earth has passed, one word will still bring forth the pride and awe of men and
women who will never meet the heroes who sit before us: D-Day.
Why is this? Of all the battles in all the wars across the span of human history, why does this
day hold such a revered place in our memory? What is it about the struggle that took place
on the sands a few short steps from here that brings us back to remember year after year
after year?
Part of it, I think, is the size of the odds that weighed against success. For three centuries, no
invader had ever been able to cross the English Channel into Normandy. And it had never
been more difficult than in 1944.
That was the year that Hitler ordered his top field marshal to fortify the Atlantic Wall against a
seaborne invasion. From the tip of Norway to southern France, the Nazis lined steep cliffs
with machine guns and artillery. Low-lying areas were flooded to block passage. Sharpened
poles awaited paratroopers. Mines were laid on the beaches and beneath the water. And by
the time of the invasion, half a million Germans waited for the Allies along the coast between
Holland and northern France.
At dawn on June 6th, the Allies came. The best chance for victory had been for the British
Royal Air Corps to take out the guns on the cliffs while airborne divisions parachuted behind
enemy lines. But all did not go according to plan. Paratroopers landed miles from their mark,
while the fog and clouds prevented Allied planes from destroying the guns on the cliffs. So
when the ships landed here at Omaha, an unimaginable hell rained down on the men inside.
Many never made it out of the boats.
And yet, despite all of this, one by one, the Allied forces made their way to shore -- here, and
at Utah and Juno; Gold and Sword. They were American, British, and Canadian. Soon, the
paratroopers found each other and fought their way back. The Rangers scaled the cliffs. And
by the end of the day, against all odds, the ground on which we stand was free once more.
The sheer improbability of this victory is part of what makes D-Day so memorable. It also
arises from the clarity of purpose with which this war was waged.
We live in a world of competing beliefs and claims about what is true. It's a world of varied
religions and cultures and forms of government. In such a world, it's all too rare for a
struggle to emerge that speaks to something universal about humanity.
The Second World War did that. No man who shed blood or lost a brother would say that war
is good. But all know that this war was essential. For what we faced in Nazi totalitarianism
was not just a battle of competing interests. It was a competing vision of humanity. Nazi
ideology sought to subjugate and humiliate and exterminate. It perpetrated murder on a
massive scale, fueled by a hatred of those who were deemed different and therefore inferior.
It was evil.
The nations that joined together to defeat Hitler's Reich were not perfect. They had made
their share of mistakes, had not always agreed with one another on every issue. But
whatever God we prayed to, whatever our differences, we knew that the evil we faced had to
be stopped. Citizens of all faiths and of no faith came to believe that we could not remain as
bystanders to the savage perpetration of death and destruction. And so we joined and sent
our sons to fight and often die so that men and women they never met might know what it is
to be free.
In America, it was an endeavor that inspired a nation to action. A President who asked his
country to pray on D-Day also asked its citizens to serve and sacrifice to make the invasion
possible. 
On farms and in factories, millions of men and women worked three shifts a day, month after
month, year after year. Trucks and tanks came from plants in Michigan and Indiana, New
York and Illinois. Bombers and fighter planes rolled off assembly lines in Ohio and Kansas,
where my grandmother did her part as an inspector. Shipyards on both coasts produced the
largest fleet in history, including the landing craft from New Orleans that eventually made it
here to Omaha.
But despite all the years of planning and preparation, despite the inspiration of our leaders,
the skill of our generals, the strength of our firepower and the unyielding support from our
home front, the outcome of the entire struggle would ultimately rest on the success of one
day in June.
Lyndon Johnson once said that there are certain moments when "¼history and fate meet at a
single time in a single place to shape a turning point in man's unending search for freedom."
D-Day was such a moment. One newspaper noted that "we have come to the hour for which
we were born." Had the Allies failed here, Hitler's occupation of this continent might have
continued indefinitely. Instead, victory here secured a foothold in France. It opened a path to
Berlin. It made possible the achievements that followed the liberation of Europe: the
Marshall Plan, the NATO alliance, the shared prosperity and security that flowed from each.
It was unknowable then, but so much of the progress that would define the 20th century, on
both sides of the Atlantic, came down to the battle for a slice of beach only six miles long and
two miles wide.
More particularly, it came down to the men who landed here -- those who now rest in this
place for eternity, and those who are with us here today. Perhaps more than any other
reason, you, the veterans of that landing, are why we still remember what happened on DDay.
You're why we keep coming back.
For you remind us that in the end, human destiny is not determined by forces beyond our
control. You remind us that our future is not shaped by mere chance or circumstance. Our
history has always been the sum total of the choices made and the actions taken by each
individual man and woman. It has always been up to us.
You could have done what Hitler believed you would do when you arrived here. In the face of
a merciless assault from these cliffs, you could have idled the boats offshore. Amid a barrage
of tracer bullets that lit the night sky, you could have stayed in those planes. You could have
hid in the hedgerows or waited behind the seawall. You could have done only what was
necessary to ensure your own survival.
But that's not what you did. That's not the story you told on D-Day. Your story was written
by men like Zane Schlemmer of the 82nd Airborne, who parachuted into a dark marsh, far
from his objective and his men. 
Lost and alone, he still managed to fight his way through the gunfire and help liberate the
town in which he landed -- a town where a street now bears his name.
It's a story written by men like Anthony Ruggiero, an Army Ranger who saw half the men on
his landing craft drown when it was hit by shellfire just a thousand yards off this beach. He
spent three hours in freezing water, and was one of only 90 Rangers to survive out of the 225
who were sent to scale the cliffs.
And it's a story written by so many who are no longer with us, like Carlton Barrett. Private
Barrett was only supposed to serve as a guide for the 1st Infantry Division, but he instead
became one of its heroes. After wading ashore in neck-deep water, he returned to the water
again and again and again to save his wounded and drowning comrades. And under the
heaviest possible enemy fire, he carried them to safety. He carried them in his own arms.
This is the story of the Allied victory. It's the legend of units like Easy Company and the AllAmerican
82nd. It's the tale of the British people, whose courage during the Blitz forced Hitler
to call off the invasion of England; the Canadians, who came even though they were never
attacked; the Russians, who sustained some of the war's heaviest casualties on the Eastern
front; and all those French men and women who would rather have died resisting tyranny
than lived within its grasp.
It is the memories that have been passed on to so many of us about the service or sacrifice of
a friend or relative. For me, it is my grandfather, Stanley Dunham, who arrived on this beach
six weeks after D-Day and marched across Europe in Patton's Army. And it is my great uncle
who was part of the first American division to reach and liberate a Nazi concentration camp.
His name is Charles Payne, and I'm so proud that he's with us here today.
I know this trip doesn't get any easier as the years pass, but for those of you who make it,
there's nothing that could keep you away. One such veteran, a man named Jim Norene, was
a member of the 502nd Parachute Infantry Division of the 101st Airborne. Last night, after
visiting this cemetery for one last time, he passed away in his sleep. Jim was gravely ill when
he left his home, and he knew that he might not return. But just as he did 65 years ago, he
came anyway. May he now rest in peace with the boys he once bled with, and may his family
always find solace in the heroism he showed here.
In the end, Jim Norene came back to Normandy for the same reason we all come back. He
came for the reason articulated by Howard Huebner, another former paratrooper who is here
with us today. When asked why he made the trip, Howard said, "It's important that we tell
our stories. It doesn't have to be something big¼just a little story about what happened -- so
people don't forget."
So people don't forget.
Friends and veterans, we cannot forget. What we must not forget is that D-Day was a time
and a place where the bravery and the selflessness of a few was able to change the course of
an entire century. At an hour of maximum danger, amid the bleakest of circumstances, men
who thought themselves ordinary found within themselves the ability to do something
extraordinary. They fought for their moms and sweethearts back home, for the fellow
warriors they came to know as brothers. And they fought out of a simple sense of duty -- a
duty sustained by the same ideals for which their countrymen had once fought and bled for
over two centuries.
That is the story of Normandy -- but also the story of America; of the Minutemen who
gathered on a green in Lexington; of the Union boys from Maine who repelled a charge at
Gettysburg; of the men who gave their last full measure of devotion at Inchon and Khe San;
of all the young men and women whose valor and goodness still carry forward this legacy of
service and sacrifice. It's a story that has never come easy, but one that always gives us
hope. For as we face down the hardships and struggles of our time, and arrive at that hour
for which we were born, we cannot help but draw strength from those moments in history
when the best among us were somehow able to swallow their fears and secure a beachhead
on an unforgiving shore.
To those men who achieved that victory 65 years ago, we thank you for your service.
May God bless you, and may God bless the memory of all those who rest here.