Thank you to the citizens of Berlin and thank you to the people of Germany. Let me thank 
Chancellor Merkel and Foreign Minister Steinmeier for welcoming me earlier today. Thank you
Mayor Wowereit, the Berlin Senate, the police, and most of all thanks to all of you for this 
extraordinary welcome. Thank you. 
I come to Berlin as so many of my countrymen have come before; although tonight, I speak 
to you not as a candidate for President, but as a citizen ­­ a proud citizen of the United States, 
and a fellow citizen of the world.
I know that I don’t look like the Americans who’ve previously spoken in this great city. The 
journey that led me here is improbable. My mother was born in the heartland of America, but
my father grew up herding goats in Kenya. His father ­­ my grandfather ­­ was a cook, a 
domestic servant to the British. 
At the height of the Cold War, my father decided, like so many others in the forgotten corners 
of the world, that his yearning ­­ his dream ­­ required the freedom and opportunity promised 
by the West. And so he wrote letter after letter to universities all across America until
somebody, somewhere answered his prayer for a better life. 
That is why I am here. And you are here because you too know that yearning. This city, of all
cities, knows the dream of freedom. And you know that the only reason we stand here tonight
is because men and women from both of our nations came together to work, and struggle,
and sacrifice for that better life.
Ours is a partnership that truly began 60 years ago this summer, on the day when the first
American plane touched down at Tempelhof. On that day much of this continent still lay in
ruin. The rubble of this city had yet to be built into a wall. The Soviet shadow had swept
across Eastern Europe, while in the West, America, Britain, and France took their stock of 
their losses, and pondered how the world might be remade.
This is where the two sides met. And on the twenty­fourth of June, 1948, the Communists 
chose to blockade the western part of the city. They cut off food and supplies to more than
two million Germans in an effort to extinguish the last flame of freedom in Berlin. 
The size of our forces was no match for the larger Soviet Army. And yet retreat would have 
allowed Communism to march across Europe. Where the last war had ended, another World 
War could have easily begun. And all that stood in the way was Berlin. And that’s when the 
airlift began, when the largest and most unlikely rescue in the history brought food and hope 
to the people of this city. 
The odds were stacked against success. In the winter, a heavy fog filled the sky above, and 
many planes were forced to turn back without dropping off the needed supplies. The streets 
where we stand were filled with hungry families who had no comfort from the cold.
But in the darkest hours, the people of Berlin kept the flame of hope burning. The people of 
Berlin refused to give up. And on one fall day, hundreds of thousands of Berliners came here,
to the Tiergarten, and heard the city’s mayor implore the world not to give up on freedom. 
“There is only one possibility,” he said. “For us to stand together united until this battle is 
won…The people of Berlin have spoken. We have done our duty," he said, "and we will keep 
on doing our duty. People of the world, now do your duty. People of the world, look at Berlin.”
People of the world ­­ look at Berlin!
Look at Berlin, where Germans and Americans learned to work together and trust each other 
less than three years after facing each other on the field of battle.
Look at Berlin, where the determination of a people met the generosity of the Marshall Plan 
and created a German miracle; where a ­­ where a victory over tyranny gave rise to NATO,
the greatest alliance ever formed to defend our common security. 
Look at Berlin, where the bullet holes in the buildings and the somber stones and pillars near 
the Brandenburg Gate insist that we never forget our common humanity. 
People of the world ­­ look at Berlin, where a wall came down, a continent came together, and 
history proved that there is no challenge too great for a world that stands as one. 
Sixty years after the airlift, we are called upon again. History has led us to a new crossroad,  with new promise and new peril.
When you, the German people, tore down that wall ­­ a wall that divided East and West; 
freedom and tyranny; fear and hope ­­ walls came tumbling down around the world. From 
Kiev to Cape Town, prison camps were closed, and the doors of democracy were opened.
Markets opened too, and the spread of information and technology reduced barriers to
opportunity and prosperity. While the 20th century taught us that we share a common
destiny, the 21st century has revealed a world more intertwined than at any time in human
history. 
The fall of the Berlin Wall brought new hope. But that very closeness has given rise to new
dangers that cannot be contained within the borders of a country or by the distance of an
ocean. 
Think about it: The terrorists of September 11th plotted in Hamburg and trained in Kandahar 
and Karachi before killing thousands from all over the globe on American soil. As we speak, 
cars in Boston and factories in Beijing are melting the ice caps in the Arctic, shrinking 
coastlines in the Atlantic, and bringing drought to farms from Kansas to Kenya.
Poorly secured nuclear material in the former Soviet Union, or secrets from a scientist in 
Pakistan could help build a bomb that detonates in Paris. The poppies in Afghanistan come to
Berlin in the form of the heroin. The poverty and violence in Somalia breeds the terror of 
tomorrow. The genocide in Darfur shames the conscience of us all. 
In this new world, such dangerous currents have swept along faster than our efforts to contain
them. And that is why we cannot afford to be divided. No one nation, no matter how large or 
powerful, can defeat such challenges alone. None of us can deny these threats, or escape 
responsibility in meeting them. In the absence of Soviet tanks and a terrible wall, it has 
become easy to forget this truth. And if we’re honest with each other, we know that 
sometimes, on both sides of the Atlantic, we have drifted apart, and forgotten our shared
destiny. 
In Europe, the view that America is part of what has gone wrong in our world, rather than a 
force to help us make it right, has become all too common. In America, there are voices that
deride and deny the importance of Europe’s role in our security and our future. Both views 
miss the truth: that Europeans today are bearing new burdens and taking more responsibility 
in critical parts of the world; and that just as American bases built in the last century still help 
to defend the security of this continent, so does our country still sacrifice greatly for freedom 
around the globe.
Yes, there have been differences between America and Europe. No doubt, there will be 
differences in the future. But the burdens of global citizenship continue to bind us together. A 
change of leadership in Washington will not lift this burden. In this new century, Americans 
and Europeans alike will be required to do more ­­ not less. Partnership and cooperation
among nations is not a choice; it is the only way, the one way, to protect our common
security and advance our common humanity.
That is why the greatest danger of all is to allow new walls to divide us from one another. The 
walls between old allies on either side of the Atlantic cannot stand. The walls between the 
countries with the most and those with the least cannot stand. The walls between races and 
tribes; natives and immigrants; Christians and Muslims and Jews cannot stand. These now are 
the walls we must tear down.  We know that these walls have fallen before. After centuries of strife, the people of Europe 
have formed a Union of promise and prosperity. Here, at the base of a column built to mark 
victory in war, we meet in the center of a Europe at peace. Not only have walls come down in
Berlin, but they've come down in Belfast, where Protestant and Catholic found a way to live 
together; in the Balkans, where our Atlantic alliance ended wars and brought savage war 
criminals to justice; and in South Africa, where the struggle of a courageous people defeated 
apartheid.
So history reminds us that walls can be torn down. But the task is never easy. True 
partnership and true progress requires constant work and sustained sacrifice. They require 
sharing the burdens of development and diplomacy; of peace and progress. They require allies 
who will listen to each other, learn from each other and, most of all, trust each other. 
That is why America cannot turn inward. That is why Europe cannot turn inward. America has 
no better partner than Europe. Now is the time to build new bridges across the globe as 
strong as the one that binds us across the Atlantic. Now is the time to join together, through
constant cooperation and strong institutions and shared sacrifice and a global commitment to
progress, to meet the challenges of the 21st century. It was this spirit that led airlift planes to
appear in the sky above our heads, and people to assemble where we stand today. And this is 
the moment when our nations ­­ and all nations ­­ must summon that spirit anew. 
This is the moment when we must defeat terror and dry up the well of extremism that 
supports it. This threat is real and we cannot shrink from our responsibility to combat it. If we 
could create NATO to face down the Soviet Union, we can join in a new and global partnership 
to dismantle the networks that have struck in Madrid and Amman; in London and Bali; in
Washington and New York. If we could win a battle of ideas against the communists, we can 
stand with the vast majority of Muslims who reject the extremism that leads to hate instead of 
hope.
This is the moment when we must renew our resolve to rout the terrorists who threaten our 
security in Afghanistan, and the traffickers who sell drugs on your streets. No one welcomes 
war. I recognize the enormous difficulties in Afghanistan. But my country and yours have a 
stake in seeing that NATO’s first mission beyond Europe’s borders is a success. For the people 
of Afghanistan, and for our shared security, the work must be done. America can't do this 
alone.  The Afghan people need our troops and your troops; our support and your support to
defeat the Taliban and al Qaeda, to develop their economy, and to help them rebuild their 
nation. We have too much at stake to turn back now.
This is the moment when we must renew the goal of a world without nuclear weapons.  The 
two superpowers that faced each other across the wall of this city came too close too often to
destroying all we have built and all that we love. With that wall gone, we need not stand idly 
by and watch the further spread of the deadly atom. It is time to secure all loose nuclear 
materials; to stop the spread of nuclear weapons; and to reduce the arsenals from another 
era. This is the moment to begin the work of seeking the peace of a world without nuclear 
weapons. 
This is the moment when every nation in Europe must have the chance to choose its own
tomorrow, free from the shadows of yesterday. In this century, we need a strong European
Union that deepens the security and prosperity of this continent, while extending a hand 
abroad. In this century ­­ in this city of all cities ­­ we must reject the Cold War mind­set of 
the past, and resolve to work with Russia when we can, to stand up for our values when we 
must, and to seek a partnership that extends across this entire continent. 
This is the moment when we must build on the wealth that open markets have created, and 
share the benefits more equitably. Trade has been a cornerstone of our growth and global
development. But we will not be able to sustain this growth if it favors the few, and not the 
many. Together we must forge trade that truly rewards the work that creates wealth, with
meaningful protections for our people and our planet. This is the moment for trade that is free 
and fair for all. 
This is the moment we must help answer the call for a new dawn in the Middle East. My 
country must stand with yours and with Europe in sending a direct message to Iran that it
must abandon its nuclear ambitions. We must support the Lebanese who've marched and bled 
for democracy, and the Israelis and the Palestinians who seek a secure and lasting peace. And 
despite past differences, this is the moment when the world should support the millions of 
Iraqis who seek to rebuild their lives, even as we pass responsibility to the Iraqi government
and finally bring this war to a close. 
This is the moment when we must come together to save this planet. Let us resolve that we 
will not leave our children to a world where the oceans rise and famine spreads and terrible 
storms devastate our lands. Let us resolve that all nations ­­ including my own ­­ will act with
the same seriousness of purpose as has your nation, and reduce the carbon we send into our 
atmosphere. This is the moment to give our children back their future. This is the moment to
stand as one. 
And this is the moment when we must give hope to those left behind in a globalized world. We 
must remember that the Cold War born in this city was not a battle for land or treasure. Sixty 
years ago, the planes that flew over Berlin did not drop bombs; instead they delivered food,
and coal, and candy to grateful children. And in that show of solidarity, those pilots won more 
than a military victory. They won hearts and minds; love and loyalty and trust ­­ not just from 
the people in this city, but from all those who heard the story of what they did here.
Now the world will watch and remember what we do here with this moment. Will we extend 
our hand to the people in the forgotten corners of this world who yearn for lives marked by 
dignity and opportunity, by security and justice? Will we lift the child in Bangladesh from 
poverty, and shelter the refugee in Chad, and banish the scourge of AIDS in our time? 
Will we stand for the human rights of the dissident in Burma, the blogger in Iran, or the voter 
in Zimbabwe? Will we give meaning to the words “never again” in Darfur? 
Will we acknowledge that there is no more powerful example than the one each of our nations 
projects to the world? Will we reject torture and stand for the rule of law? Will we welcome 
immigrants from different lands, and shun discrimination against those who don’t look like us 
or worship like we do, and keep the promise of equality and opportunity for all of our people? 
People of Berlin ­­ people of the world ­­ this is our moment. This is our time. 
I know my country has not perfected itself. At times, we’ve struggled to keep the promise of 
liberty and equality for all of our people. We’ve made our share of mistakes, and there are 
times when our actions around the world have not lived up to our best intentions. 
But I also know how much I love America. I know that for more than two centuries, we have 
strived ­­ at great cost and great sacrifice ­­ to form a more perfect union; to seek, with other 
nations, a more hopeful world. Our allegiance has never been to any particular tribe or 
kingdom ­­ indeed, every language is spoken in our country; every culture has left its imprint
on ours; every point of view is expressed in our public squares. What has always united us, 
what has always driven our people, what drew my father to America’s shores is a set of ideals 
that speak to aspirations shared by all people: that we can live free from fear and free from 
want; that we can speak our minds and assemble with whomever we choose and worship as 
we please. 
These are the aspirations that join the fates of all nations in this city. These aspirations are 
bigger than anything that drives us apart. It is because of these aspirations that the airlift
began. It is because of these aspirations that all free people ­­ everywhere ­­ became citizens 
of Berlin. It is in pursuit of these aspirations that a new generation ­­ our generation ­­ must
make our mark on the world.
People of Berlin, and people of the world, the scale of our challenge is great. The road ahead
will be long. But I come before you to say that we are heirs to a struggle for freedom. We are 
a people of improbable hope. With an eye toward the future, with resolve in our heart, let us 
remember this history, and answer our destiny, and remake the world once again. 
Thank you, Berlin. God bless you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Madam President. And thank you to the distinguished Senator from
Connecticut not only for yielding time, but also for the extraordinarily hard work that he's put
in over the last several days and, in fact, over a -- a week. And I want to thank his
counterparts on the other side, including Senator Gregg, for their hard work.
Now, the fact that we're even here voting on a plan to rescue our economy from the greed
and irresponsibility of Wall Street and some in Washington is an outrage. It's an outrage to
every American who works hard, pays their taxes, is doing their best every day to make a
better life for themselves and their families. And understandably, people are frustrated and
they're angry that Wall Street's mistakes have put their tax dollars at risk. And they should
be. I'm frustrated and angry, too.
But while there's plenty of blame to go around -- and many in Washington and Wall Street
who deserve it, all of us -- all of us have a responsibility to solve this crisis, because it affects
the financial well-being of every single American. There will be time to punish those who set
this fire, but now is not the time to argue about how it got set, or did the neighbor sleep in his
bed, or leave the stove on. Right now we want to put out that fire; and now's the time for us
to come together and do that.
When the House of Representatives failed to act on Monday, we saw the single largest decline
in the stock market in two decades. Over one trillion dollars of wealth was lost by the time the
markets closed. And it wasn't just the wealth of a few CEOs or Wall Street executives. The
401(k)s and retirement accounts of millions became smaller. The state pension funds of
teachers and government employees lost billions upon billions of dollars. Hard-working
Americans who invested their nest egg to watch it grow saw it diminish and in some cases
disappear.
And while that decline was devastating, the consequences of the credit crisis that caused it
will be even worse if we do not act now. We're in a very dangerous situation, where financial
institutions across this country are afraid to lend money. And if all that meant was the failure
of a few banks in New York, that would be one thing. But that's not what it means. What it
means is, if we don't act, it will be harder for Americans to get a mortgage for their home or
loans they need to buy a car or send their children to college.
What it means is that businesses won't be able to get the loans they need to open a new
factory or make payroll for their workers. And if they can't make payroll on Friday, then
workers are laid off on Monday. And if workers are laid off on Monday, then they can't pay
their bills or pay back their loans to somebody else. And it will go on and on and on, rippling
through the entire economy. And potentially we could see thousands of businesses close,
millions of jobs could be lost, and a long and painful recession could follow. In other words,
this is not just a Wall Street crisis; it's an American crisis. And it's the American economy that
needs this rescue plan.
I understand completely why people would be skeptical when this President asks for a blank
check to solve this problem. I was, too, as was Senator Dodd and a whole bunch of us here.
And that's why, over a week ago, I demanded that this plan include some specific proposals to
protect taxpayers, protections that the Administration eventually agreed to, and, thanks to the
hard work of Senator Dodd and Republican counterparts like Senator Gregg, we here in the
Senate have agreed to, and now hopefully the House will agree to, as well.
Let me just go over those principles:
Number one, I said we needed an independent board to provide oversight and
accountability for how and where this money is spent at every step of the way.
Number two, I said that we cannot help banks on Wall Street without helping the
millions of innocent homeowners who are struggling to stay in their homes. They
deserve a plan, too.
Number three, I said that I would not allow this plan to become a welfare program for
Wall Street executives, whose greed and irresponsibility got us into this mess.
And, finally, I said that, if American taxpayers are financing this solution, then they
have to be treated like investors. They should get every penny of their tax dollars back
once the economy recovers.
Now, this last part is important, because it's been the most misunderstood and poorly
communicated part of this plan. This is not a plan to just hand over 700 billion dollars of
taxpayer money to a few banks. If this is managed correctly -- and that's an important "if" --
we will hopefully get most or all of our money back and possibly even turn a profit on the
government's intervention, every penny of which will go directly back to the American people.
And if we fall short, we will levy a fee on financial institutions so that they can repay for the
losses that they caused.
Now, let me -- let's acknowledge, even with all these taxpayer protections, this plan is not
perfect. Democrats and Republicans in Congress have legitimate concerns about it. Some of
my closest colleagues, people I have the greatest respect for, still have problems with it and
may choose to vote against this bill, and I think that we can respectfully disagree. I
understand their frustrations.
I also know that many -- many Americans share their concerns. But it's clear that, from my
perspective, this is what we need to do right now to prevent the possibility of a crisis turning
into a catastrophe. It is conceivable -- it's possible that if we did nothing everything would
turn out okay. It's -- There -- There's a possibility that that's true. And there's no doubt that
there may be other plans out there that, had we had two or three or six months to develop,
might be even more refined and might serve our purposes better.
But we don't have that kind of time. And we can't afford to take a risk that the economy of
the United States of America and, as a consequence, the worldwide economy could be
plunged into a very, very deep hole. So to Democrats and Republicans who've opposed this
plan, I say: Step up to the plate. Let's do what's right for the country at this time, because
the time to act is now.
I know many Americans are wondering what happens next. And passing this bill can't be the
end of our work to strengthen our economy; it must be the beginning. Because one thing I --
I think all of us who may end up supporting this bill understand is that, even if we get this in
place, we could still have enormous problems and probably will have big problems in the
economy over the next several months and potentially longer; because the fact is, is that we
have seen some mismanagement of the fundamentals of the economy for a very long time,
and we are not going to dig ourselves out of that hole immediately.
So this is not the end. This is the beginning. As soon as we pass this rescue plan, we need to
move aggressively with the same sense of urgency to rescue families on Main Street who are
struggling to pay their bills and keep their jobs. They've been in crisis a lot longer than Wall
Street has.
I've said it before and I say it again: We need to pass an economic stimulus package that will
help ordinary Americans cope with rising food and gas prices, that can save one million jobs
rebuilding our schools, and roads, and our infrastructure, and help states and cities avoid
budget cuts and tax increase[s], a -- a plan that would extend expiring unemployment
benefits for those Americans who've lost their jobs and cannot find new ones. That's the right
thing to do at a time when consumer confidence is down and we are in great danger of
slipping into a big recession.
We also must do more in this rescue package in order to help homeowners stay in their
homes. I will continue to advocate bankruptcy reforms. I know my colleague from Illinois,
Dick Durbin, has been a strong champion of this, as have many. It is the right thing to do to
change our bankruptcy laws so that people have a better chance of staying in their homes and
we're not seeing communities devastated all across the country. And we should encourage
Treasury to study the option of buying individual mortgages, like we did successfully in the
1930s.
And finally, while we all hope that this rescue package succeeds, we should be prepared to
take more vigorous actions in the months ahead to rebuild capital, if it's necessary.
Now, just as families are planning for their future in tough times, Washington's going to have
to do the same. Runaway spending and record deficits are not how families run their budgets.
It can't be how Washington handles people's tax dollars. So we're going to have to return to
the fiscal responsibility we had in the 1990s. And the next White House and the next Congress
is going to have to work together to make sure that we go through our budget, we get rid of
programs that don't work, that we make the ones that do work better and cost less. With less
money flowing into the Treasury, some useful programs or policies might need to be delayed.
And some might be -- need to be stretched out over a longer period of time.
But there are certain investments in our future that we cannot delay, precisely because our
economy is in turmoil.
Mr. President, I've exceeded the time a little bit. I would like unanimous consent for a couple
more minutes.
There are certain investments in our future that we can't delay precisely be -- because the
economy's in turmoil. We can't wait to help Americans keep up with rising costs and shrinking
paychecks, and we're going to do that by making sure that we are giving our workers a
middle-class tax cut.
We can't wait to relieve the burden of crushing health care costs. We can't wait to create
millions of new jobs by rebuilding our roads and our bridges, and investing in broadband lines
in rural communities, and fixing our electricity grid so we can get renewable energy to
population centers that need them. And we need to develop an energy policy that prevents us
from sending 700 billion dollars a year to tyrants and dictators for their oil. We can't wait to
educate the next generation of Americans with the skills and knowledge they need to compete
with any workers anywhere in the world. These are the priorities we cannot delay.
Now, let me just close by saying this: I do not think this is going to be easy. It's not going to
come without costs. We are all going to need to sacrifice. We're all going to need to pull our
weight, because now, more than ever, we are all in this together. That's part of what this
crisis has taught us -- that in the end of the day, there's no real separation between Wall
Street and Main Street. There's only the road we're traveling on as Americans. And we will
rise or fall on that journey as one nation and as one people.
I know that many Americans are feeling anxiety right now about their jobs, about their
homes, about their life savings. But I also know this, that we can steer ourselves out of this
crisis. We are -- always have. During the great financial crisis of the last century, in his first
fireside chat, FDR told his fellow Americans that,
There is an element in the re-adjustment of our financial system more important than
currency, more important than gold, and that is the confidence of the people
themselves. Confidence and courage are the essentials of success in carrying out our
plan.
Let us unite in banishing fear. Together we cannot fail. We cannot fail, not now, not tomorrow,
not next year.
This is a nation that's faced down war and depression, great challenges and great threats. And
at each and every moment, we have risen to meet up these challenges, not as Democrats, not
as Republicans, but as Americans, with resolve and with confidence, with that fundamental
belief that, here in America, our destiny is not written for us, it's written by us. And that's who
we are. And that's the country I know we can be right now.
I want to thank again the extraordinary leadership of Chairman Dodd and Banking -- the
Banking Committee, as well as Chairman Baucus and Majority Leader Reid. They have worked
tirelessly. I want to thank the leadership in the House of Representatives.
I urge my colleagues to join me in supporting this important legislation, understanding that
this will not solve all our problems. It is a necessary but not sufficient step to make sure that
this economy once again works on behalf of all Americans in their pursuit of the American
dream.
Thank you, Mr. President. I yield the floor.
