Thank you for the extraordinary welcome. And thanks for those of you who prepared, from
the CIA gift shop, the t-shirts, the caps, the water bottles. Michelle and the girls will
appreciate that very much.
It is a great honor to be here with the men and women of the CIA. I’ve been eager to come
out here to Langley for some time so I can deliver a simple message to you in person on
behalf of the American people: Thank you. Thank you for all the work that you do to protect
the American people and the freedom that we all cherish.
The CIA is fundamental to America’s national security. And I want you to know that that’s why
I nominated such an outstanding public servant and close friend, Leon Panetta, to lead -- to
lead the agency. He is one of our nation’s finest public servants. He has my complete
confidence. And he is a strong voice in my national security team, as well as a strong
advocate for the men and women of the CIA.
I also benefit from the counsel of several agency veterans -- chief among them, Steve
Kappes, who’s stayed on to serve as Leon’s deputy. He’s -- and he’s done outstanding work. 
I have to add, just as an aside, by the way, I just met with a smaller group of about 50, so we
could have a dialogue. And all of you look really young. And so to have a graybeard literally
and figuratively like Steve Kappes here, I think, is absolutely critical.
I also want you to know that we have one of your own, John Brennan, who is doing a terrific
job as my adviser for counterterrorism and homeland security. And we are very grateful for
the work that he does and the insights that he brings, from his long years of service here at
the CIA.
And I would be remiss if I didn’t mention the extraordinary former CIA officer and Director of
Central Intelligence, Bob Gates, who is also part of our Cabinet and every once in a while
gives me a few tips.
So let me share with you just a few thoughts about the situation in which we find ourselves.
First, I want to underscore the importance of the CIA. When the CIA was founded, you were
focused on one overarching threat, the Soviet Union. And for decades, the CIA carried out a
critically important mission. And with the end of the Cold War, some wondered how important
the CIA would be to our future. Now we know.
Here in the 21st century, we’ve learned that the CIA is more important than ever. For as Leon
mentioned, we face a wide range of unconventional challenges: stateless terrorist networks
like al-Qaeda, the spread of catastrophic weapons, cyberthreats, failed states, rogue regimes,
persistent conflict. And now we have to add to our list piracy.
The CIA is unique in the capabilities of collection, analysis and operation that you bring to
bear. So you are an indispensable tool, the tip of the spear in America’s intelligence mission
and our national security.
It is because of you that I can make good decisions. You prove that the key to good
intelligence is not simply technology. It’s the quality of the men and women who have signed
up to serve.
You’re on the front lines against unconventional challenges.
You help us understand the world as it is. You support the work of our troops and our
diplomats and law enforcement officers. You disrupt terrorist plots, and you’re critical to our
efforts to destroy terrorist networks. You serve capably, courageously, and from here in
Virginia to dangerous outposts around the globe, you make enormous sacrifices on our behalf.
So you should be proud of what you do.
Second, you need to know that you’ve got my full support. For decades, the American people
have counted on you to protect them. I know that I’ve come to personally count on your
services. I rely on your reporting and your analysis, which finds its way onto my desk every
single day.
And I know you’ve got a tough job. I know there’s no margin for error. And I know there are
endless demands for intelligence. There is an urgent necessity to collect and analyze
information and to work seamlessly with other agencies to act on it.
And -- And what makes it tougher is when you succeed, as you so often do, that success
usually has to stay secret. So you don’t get credit when things go good, but you sure get
some blame when things don’t.
 Now -- I got an amen corner out there.
Now, in that context, I know that the last few days have been difficult.
As I made clear, in releasing the OLC memos as a consequence of a court case that was
pending and to which it was very difficult for us to mount an effective legal defense, I acted
primarily because of the exceptional circumstances that surrounded these memos, particularly
the fact that so much of the information was public -- had been publicly acknowledged. The
covert nature of the information had been compromised.
I have fought to protect the integrity of classified information in the past, and I will do so in
the future. And there is nothing more important than protecting the identities of CIA officers. 
So I need everybody to be clear: we will protect your identities and your security as you
vigorously pursue your missions. I will be as vigorous in protecting you as you are vigorous in
protecting the American people.
Now, I have put an end to the interrogation techniques described in those OLC memos. And I
want to -- I want to be very clear and very blunt. I’ve done so for a simple reason: because I
believe that our nation is stronger and more secure when we deploy the full measure of both
our power and the power of our values, including the rule of law. I know I can count on you to
do exactly that.
You know, there have been some conversations that I’ve had with senior folks here at Langley
in which I think people have expressed understandable anxiety and concern. So I -- I -- I
want to make a point that I just made in the smaller group. I understand that it’s hard when
you are asked to protect the American people against people who have no scruples and would
willingly and gladly kill innocents.
Al-Qaeda’s not constrained by a constitution. Many of our adversaries are not constrained by a
belief in freedom of speech or representation in court or rule of law. So I’m sure that
sometimes it seems as if that means we’re operating with one hand tied behind our back or
that those who would argue for a higher standard are naive. I understand that. You know, I’ve
-- I watch the cable shows once in a while.
What makes the United States special, and what makes you special, is precisely the fact that
we are willing to uphold our values and ideals even when it’s hard -- not just when it’s easy;
even when we are afraid and under threat -- not just when it’s expedient to do so. That’s what
makes us different.
So yes, you’ve got a harder job. And so do I. And that’s okay, because that’s why we can take
such extraordinary pride in being Americans. And over the long term, that is why I believe we
will defeat our enemies: because we’re on the better side of history.
So don’t be discouraged by what’s happened in the last few weeks. Don’t be discouraged that
we have to acknowledge potentially we’ve made some mistakes. That’s how we learn. 
But the fact that we are willing to acknowledge them and then move forward, that is precisely
why I am proud to be President of the United States, and that’s why you should be proud to
be members of the CIA. All right?
Third point -- Third point -- I want you to know how much the American people appreciate
your service. Sometimes it’s hard to acknowledge sacrifices made by the people whose work,
or even identity, must remain secret, and that’s part of the enormous burden that you carry
when you sign up. But you make the extraordinary sacrifice of giving up parts of your life in
service to your country. Many of you take long deployments overseas. You miss seeing your
families; you miss weekend barbecues and the birthday parties, watching your children grow
up. You can’t even exchange in the simplest pleasures of talking about your job -- or
complaining about your job openly.
There are few signs of patriotism more powerful than offering to serve out of the limelight,
and so many of you have signed up to serve after 9/11 -- that’s partly why you’re all so young
-- fully aware of the dangers before you. You serve courageously, but your courage is only
known to a few. You accomplish remarkable things, but the credit you receive is the private
knowledge that you’ve done something to secure this country. That’s a sacrifice that’s carved
into those marble walls. Those 89 stars stand as a testament to both the men and women of
the CIA who gave their lives in service to their country, and to all who dedicate themselves to
the mission of this agency.
Now we must look forward to the future with confidence. All that you’ve achieved, I believe
that the CIA’s best days are still yet to come. And you will have my support and appreciation
as you carry on this critical work.
We live in dangerous times. I am going to need you more than ever, precisely because we’re
seeing changes in our foreign policy, and we want to send a new message to the world. That
requires better intelligence, not less of it. That means that we’re going to have to operate
smarter and more effectively than ever. So I’m going to be relying on you, and the American
people are going to rely on you. And I hope that you will continue to take extraordinary pride
in the challenges that come with the job.
Thank you very much. God bless you. And God bless the United States of America.
Thank you very much. To Sara Bloomfield, for the wonderful introduction and the outstanding
work she's doing; to Fred Zeidman; Joel Geiderman; Mr. Wiesel -- thank you for your wisdom
and your witness; Speaker Nancy Pelosi; Senator Dick Durbin; members of Congress; our
good friend the Ambassador of Israel; members of the United States Holocaust Memorial
Council; and most importantly, the survivors and rescuers and their families who are here
today. It is a great honor for me to be here, and I'm grateful that I have the opportunity to
address you briefly.
We gather today to mourn the loss of so many lives, and celebrate those who saved them;
honor those who survived, and contemplate the obligations of the living.
It is the grimmest of ironies that one of the most savage, barbaric acts of evil in history began
in one of the most modernized societies of its time, where so many markers of human
progress became tools of human depravity: science that can heal used to kill; education that
can enlighten used to rationalize away basic moral impulses; the bureaucracy that sustains
modern life used as the machinery of mass death -- a ruthless, chillingly efficient system
where many were responsible for the killing, but few got actual blood on their hands.
While the uniqueness of the Holocaust in scope and in method is truly astounding, the
Holocaust was driven by many of the same forces that have fueled atrocities throughout
history: the scapegoating that leads to hatred and blinds us to our common humanity; the
justifications that replace conscience and allow cruelty to spread; the willingness of those who
are neither perpetrators nor victims to accept the assigned role of bystander, believing the lie
that good people are ever powerless or alone, the fiction that we do not have a choice.
But while we are here today to bear witness to the human capacity to destroy, we are also
here to pay tribute to the human impulse to save. In the moral accounting of the Holocaust,
as we reckon with numbers like 6 million, as we recall the horror of numbers etched into
arms, we also factor in numbers like these: 7,200 -- the number of Danish Jews ferried to
safety, many of whom later returned home to find the neighbors who rescued them had also
faithfully tended their homes and businesses and belongings while they were gone.
We remember the number five -- the five righteous men and women who join us today from
Poland. We are awed by your acts of courage and conscience. And your presence today
compels each of us to ask ourselves whether we would have done what you did. We can only
hope that the answer is yes.
We also remember the number 5,000 -- the number of Jews rescued by the villagers of Le
Chambon, France -- one life saved for each of its 5,000 residents. Not a single Jew who came
there was turned away, or turned in. But it was not until decades later that the villagers spoke
of what they had done -- and even then, only reluctantly. The author of a book on the rescue
found that those he interviewed were baffled by his interest. "How could you call us 'good'?"
they said. "We were doing what had to be done."
That is the question of the righteous -- those who would do extraordinary good at
extraordinary risk not for affirmation or acclaim or to advance their own interests, but because
it is what must be done. They remind us that no one is born a savior or a murderer -- these
are choices we each have the power to make. They teach us that no one can make us into
bystanders without our consent, and that we are never truly alone -- that if we have the
courage to heed that "still, small voice" within us, we can form a minyan for righteousness
that can span a village, even a nation.
Their legacy is our inheritance. And the question is, how do we honor and preserve it? How do
we ensure that "never again" isn't an empty slogan, or merely an aspiration, but also a call to
action?
I believe we start by doing what we are doing today -- by bearing witness, by fighting the
silence that is evil's greatest co-conspirator.
In the face of horrors that defy comprehension, the impulse to silence is understandable. My
own great uncle returned from his service in World War II in a state of shock, saying little,
alone with painful memories that would not leave his head. He went up into the attic,
according to the stories that I've heard, and wouldn't come down for six months. He was one
of the liberators -- someone who at a very tender age had seen the unimaginable. And so
some of the liberators who are here today honor us with their presence -- all of whom we
honor for their extraordinary service. My great uncle was part of the 89th Infantry Division --
the first Americans to reach a Nazi concentration camp. And they liberated Ohrdruf, part of
Buchenwald, where tens of thousands had perished.
The story goes that when the Americans marched in, they discovered the starving survivors
and the piles of dead bodies. And General Eisenhower made a decision. He ordered Germans
from the nearby town to tour the camp, so they could see what had been done in their name.
And he ordered American troops to tour the camp, so they could see the evil they were
fighting against. Then he invited congressmen and journalists to bear witness. And he ordered
that photographs and films be made. Some of us have seen those same images, whether in
the Holocaust Museum or when I visited Yad Vashem, and they never leave you. Eisenhower
said that he wanted "to be in a position to give firsthand evidence of these things, if ever, in
the future, there develops a tendency to charge these allegations merely to propaganda."
Eisenhower understood the danger of silence. He understood that if no one knew what had
happened, that would be yet another atrocity -- and it would be the perpetrators' ultimate
triumph.
What Eisenhower did to record these crimes for history is what we are doing here today.
That's what Elie Wiesel and the survivors we honor here do by fighting to make their
memories part of our collective memory. That's what the Holocaust Museum does every day
on our National Mall, the place where we display for the world our triumphs and failures and
the lessons we've learned from our history. It's the very opposite of silence.
But we must also remember that bearing witness is not the end of our obligation -- it's just
the beginning. We know that evil has yet to run its course on Earth. We've seen it in this
century in the mass graves and the ashes of villages burned to the ground, and children used
as soldiers and rape used as a weapon of war. To this day, there are those who insist the
Holocaust never happened; who perpetrate every form of intolerance -- racism and antiSemitism,
homophobia, xenophobia, sexism, and more -- hatred that degrades its victim and
diminishes us all.
Today, and every day, we have an opportunity, as well as an obligation, to confront these
scourges -- to fight the impulse to turn the channel when we see images that disturb us, or
wrap ourselves in the false comfort that others' sufferings are not our own. Instead we have
the opportunity to make a habit of empathy; to recognize ourselves in each other; to commit
ourselves to resisting injustice and intolerance and indifference in whatever forms they may
take -- whether confronting those who tell lies about history, or doing everything we can to
prevent and end atrocities like those that took place in Rwanda, those taking place in Darfur.
That is my commitment as President. I hope that is yours, as well.
It will not be easy. At times, fulfilling these obligations require self-reflection. But in the final
analysis, I believe history gives us cause for hope rather than despair -- the hope of a chosen
people who have overcome oppression since the days of Exodus; of the nation of Israel rising
from the destruction of the Holocaust; of the strong and enduring bonds between our nations.
It is the hope, too, of those who not only survived, but chose to live, teaching us the meaning
of courage and resilience and dignity. I'm thinking today of a study conducted after the war
that found that Holocaust survivors living in America actually had a higher birthrate than
American Jews. What a stunning act of faith -- to bring a child in a world that has shown you
so much cruelty; to believe that no matter what you have endured, or how much you have
lost, in the end, you have a duty to life.
We find cause for hope as well in Protestant and Catholic children attending school together in
Northern Ireland; in Hutus and Tutsis living side by side, forgiving neighbors who have done
the unforgivable; in a movement to save Darfur that has thousands of high school and college
chapters in 25 countries, and brought 70,000 people to the Washington Mall -- people of
every age and faith and background and race united in common cause with suffering brothers
and sisters halfway around the world.
Those numbers can be our future -- our fellow citizens of the world showing us how to make
the journey from oppression to survival, from witness to resistance, and ultimately to
reconciliation. That is what we mean when we say "never again."
So today, during this season when we celebrate liberation, resurrection, and the possibility of
redemption, may each of us renew our resolve to do what must be done. And may we strive
each day, both individually and as a nation, to be among the righteous.
Thank you, God bless you, and God bless the United States of America.