Good morning, everybody. Before I introduce America's next Surgeon General, I'd like to say
a few words about our ongoing efforts to reform the health care system that she will help
oversee.
We are now closer to the goal of health care reform than we have ever been. Over the last
several weeks, key committees in the House and the Senate have made important and
unprecedented progress on a plan that will lower costs, provide better care for patients, and
curb the worst practices of the insurance companies. It's a plan that will not add to our deficit
over the next decade. Let me repeat that: It is a plan that will not add to our deficit over the
next decade -- and eventually will help lower our deficit by slowing the skyrocketing cost of
Medicare and Medicaid.
Even though we are close, I've got no illusions that it's going to be easy to get over the finish
line. There are going to be more debates and more disagreements before all is said and
done. But health care reform must be done.
I know there are those who believe we should wait to solve this problem, or take a more
incremental approach, or simply do nothing. But this is the kind of criticism we heard when
the country tried to pass Medicare, a program that is now providing quality care to
generations of American seniors. It's the kind of criticism we heard when we tried to pass the
Children's Health Insurance Program, which has provided quality care and coverage to millions
of kids. It's the same Washington thinking that has ignored big challenges and put off tough
decisions for decades. And it is precisely that kind of small thinking that has led us into the
current predicament.
So make no mistake: The status quo on health care is no longer an option for the United
States of America. If we step back from this challenge right now, we will leave our children a
legacy of debt -- a future of crushing costs that bankrupt our families, our businesses, and
because we will have done nothing to bring down the cost of Medicare and Medicaid, will crush
our government. Premiums will continue to skyrocket -- placing what amounts to another tax
on American families struggling to pay bills. The insurance companies and special interests
that have killed reform in the past will only continue to benefit even more -- and they'll
continue to deny coverage to Americans with pre-existing medical conditions. People will
continue to lose health insurance just because they lose their job or they change jobs.
This is a future that we cannot afford. This country can't afford to have health care premiums
rise three times faster than people's wages, as they did over the last decade. We can't afford
14,000 Americans losing their health care every single day. We can't afford a future where
our government will eventually spend more on Medicare and Medicaid than what we spend on
everything else.
And during the campaign, I promised health care reform that would control costs, expand
coverage, and ensure choice. And I promised that Americans making $250,000 a year or less
would not pay more in taxes. These are promises that we're keeping as reform moves
forward.
This is no longer a problem we can wait to fix. This is about who we are as a country. Health
care reform is about every family's health, but it's also about the health of the economy.
So I just want to put everybody on notice, because there was a lot of chatter during the week
that I was gone: We are going to get this done. Inaction is not an option. And for those naysayers
and cynics who think that this is not going to happen, don't bet against us. We are
going to make this thing happen, because the American people desperately need it.
And even those who are satisfied with their health care right now, they understand that if
premiums keep on doubling and if employers keep on shedding health insurance because it's
unsustainable and if you look at the trajectory of where Medicare and Medicaid are going, then
inaction will create the biggest crisis of all.
And so I understand people are a little nervous and a little scared about making change. The
muscles in this town to bring about big changes are a little atrophied, but we're whipping folks
back into shape. We are going to get this done. And if there's anyone who understands the
urgency of meeting this challenge in a personal and powerful way, it's the woman who will
become our nation's next Surgeon General, Dr. Regina Benjamin.
The list of qualifications that make Dr. Benjamin an outstanding candidate to be America's
leading spokesperson on issues of public health are long indeed. She was in the second class
at Morehouse School of Medicine and went on to earn an MD from the University of Alabama
at Birmingham and an MBA from Tulane. She served as Associate Dean for Rural Health at
the University of South Alabama College of Medicine, and in 1995, she became the first
physician under 40 and the first African American woman to be named to the American
Medical Association's Board of Trustees. In 2002, she became President of Alabama's State
Medical Association. And she has received numerous awards and recognitions, including the
MacArthur Genius Award. It's very impressive.
But of all these achievements and experience, none has been more pertinent to today's
challenges or closer to Regina's heart than the rural health clinic that she has built and rebuilt
in Bayou La Batre -- did I say that right? Well, tell me how to say it.
Bayou La Batre. That's in Alabama, people.
Bayou La Batre is a rural town of about 2,500 people. It's a shrimping town, where a lot of
folks work for themselves, scrape by, and can't usually afford health insurance. And by the
way, Dr. Benjamin, while we were talking in the Oval Office, described for me the
demographics of this town are actually very interesting, because you've got whites, blacks,
and Asians in this community. There are a lot of Laotians and Cambodians who have moved
there and are part of this shrimping town, so it's a diverse but very poor rural community.
And like so many other rural communities, doctors and hospitals are hard to come by. And
that's why, even though she could have left the state to make more money as a specialist or
as a doctor in a wealthier community, Regina Benjamin returned to Alabama and opened a
small clinic in Bayou La Batre.
When people couldn't pay, she didn't charge them. When the clinic wasn't making money,
she didn't take a salary for herself. When Hurricane George destroyed the clinic in 1998, she
made house calls to all her patients while it was rebuilt. When Hurricane Katrina destroyed it
again and left most of her town homeless, she mortgaged her house and maxed out her credit
cards to rebuild that clinic for a second time. She tended to those who had been wounded in
the storm, and when folks needed medicine, she asked the pharmacist to send the bill her
way.
And when Regina's clinic was about to open for the third time, and a fire burned it to the
ground before it could serve the first patient, well, you can guess what Dr. Benjamin did.
With help from her community, she is rebuilding it again. One disabled patient brought her an
envelope with $20 inside. Another elderly man said simply, "Maybe I can help. I got a
hammer."
For nearly two decades, Dr. Regina Benjamin has seen in a very personal way what is broken
about our health care system. She's seen an increasing number of patients who've had health
insurance their entire lives suddenly lose it because they lost their jobs or because it's simply
become too expensive. She's been a relentless promoter of prevention and wellness
programs, having treated too many costly and -- diseases and complications that didn't have
to happen. And she's witnessed the shortage of primary care physicians in the rural and
underserved areas where she works.
But for all that she's seen and all the tremendous obstacles that she has overcome, Regina
Benjamin also represents what's best about health care in America -- doctors and nurses who
give and care and sacrifice for the sake of their patients; those Americans who would do
anything to heal a fellow citizen. Through floods and fires and severe want, Regina Benjamin
has refused to give up. Her patients have refused to give up. And when we were talking in
the Oval Office, she said: The one thing I want to do is make sure that this Surgeon General's
Office gives voice to patients, that patients have a seat at the table; somebody is advocating
for them and speaking for them.
And now we in Washington and across America have to refuse to give up on the goal of health
care that is affordable and accessible for every last one of us. We don't have to deal with
hurricanes and we don't have to deal with floods and we don't have to deal with fires; all we
have to do is pass a bill to make sure that the American people have a decent shot at getting
the kind of choice and high-quality health care that's affordable.
And I know that Dr. Benjamin is going to help us get there as the next Surgeon General. And
I am truly honored to nominate her for that post, and Secretary Sebelius is equally excited,
even though she's just standing here.
With that, let me introduce the next Surgeon General of the United States, Dr. Regina
Benjamin.
Hello, Michigan! Thank you. Thank you so much. First of all, give Joe a big round of applause
for the wonderful introduction. We've got some special guests here -- now, if everybody has
chairs, go ahead and use them. Feel free. We've got some special guests here today that I
just want to acknowledge. All of you are special, but these folks I want to make sure that you
have a chance to see them.
First of all, one of the best governors in the country, please give Jennifer Granholm a big
round of applause. Lieutenant Governor John Cherry -- give John a big round of applause.
One of my favorite people, a former colleague of mine, still just a fighter on behalf of working
families each and every day -- Senator Debbie Stabenow. We've got Speaker of the House,
Andy Dillon, in the house. We've got a lot of other local elected officials, and I just want to
thank them.
A couple of people who are missing: Carl Levin, who is doing great work. He's in the Senate
right now fighting on behalf of a bill to make sure that we're not loading up a bunch of
necessary defense spending with unnecessary defense spending. So he's the point person on
it. The only reason he's not here is because he is working alongside the administration to get
this bill done. Please give him a big round of applause. Congressman Sandy Levin, also
working hard on your behalf each and every day, but is not here today. I want to go ahead
and acknowledge the new mayor, since he's the new mayor -- Mayor Dave Bing, great ball
player. My game is a little like Dave Bing's -- except I don't have the jump shot or the speed
or the ball handling skills -- or the endurance. Also don't have the afro. Don't think I forgot
that, Dave. I remember. I remember that.
I also want to acknowledge that we've got the Executive Director of the White House Council
on Auto Communities and Workers, who's working hard, has a direct line to me each and
every day. He's traveling constantly back here -- Ed Montgomery. Please give Ed a big round
of applause.
And the Chairman of the Grand Traverse Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indian Tribe, Derek
Bailey is here. Please give Derek a big round of applause.
And finally, the president of the college where we are here, Jim Jacobs. Give Jim Jacobs a big
round of applause.
And those of you who I've missed, you know how grateful I am that you're here. And thank
you all. It is wonderful to be back at Macomb. It was terrific visiting this campus as a
candidate, but I have to admit, it's even better visiting as a President.
Now, this is a place where anyone -- anyone with a desire to learn and to grow, to take their
career to a new level or start a new career altogether -- has the opportunity to pursue their
dream, right here in Macomb. This is a place where people of all ages and all backgrounds --
even in the face of obstacles, even in the face of very difficult personal challenges -- can take
a chance on a brighter future for themselves and their families.
There are folks like Joe, who just told us his story. When Joe lost his job, he decided to take
advantage of assistance for displaced workers. He earned his associate degree here at
Macomb, and with a pretty impressive GPA, I might add. And with the help of that degree,
Joe found a new job, working for the new Henry Ford West Bloomfield Hospital as a
maintenance mechanic, using the skills he learned here and the talents that he brought to
make a fresh start.
There are workers like Kellie Kulman, who is here today. Where's Kellie? Raise your hand,
Kellie. Where are you? There you are. There's Kellie right there. Kellie is a UAW worker at a
Ford plant in Sterling Heights, Michigan. She used to drive a fork lift, right? But then she
decided to train here at Macomb for a job that required new skills, and now she's an
apprentice pipe fitter. It's a telling example: Even as this painful restructuring takes place in
our auto industry, workers are seeking out training for new auto jobs. And Joe and Kellie's
story make clear what all of you know: Community colleges are an essential part of our
recovery in the present -- and our prosperity in the future. This place can make the future
better, not just for these individuals but for America.
Now, since this recession began 20 months ago, 6.5 million Americans have lost their jobs,
and I don't have to tell you Michigan in particular has been hard-hit. Now, I -- the statistics
are daunting. The whole country now, the unemployment rate is approaching 10 percent.
Here in Michigan, it's about five points higher. And new jobs of course are going to be coming
out and we're going to see continuing job loss even as the economy is beginning to stabilize.
Now, that's not just abstractions. Those just aren't numbers on a page. Those are
extraordinary hardships, tough times, for families and individuals who've worked hard all their
lives and have done the right things all their lives. If you haven't lost a job, chances are you
know somebody who has: a family member, a neighbor, a friend, a coworker. And you know
that as difficult as the financial struggle can be, the sense of loss is about more than just a
paycheck, because most of us define ourselves by the work we do. That's part of what it
means to be an American. We take pride in work -- that sense that you're contributing,
supporting your family, meeting your responsibilities. People need work not just for income,
but because it makes you part of that fabric of a community that's so important. And so when
you lose your job, and when entire communities are losing thousands of jobs, that's a heavy
burden, that's a heavy weight.
Now, my administration has a job to do, as well, and that job is to get this economy back on
its feet. That's my job. And it's a job I gladly accept. I love these folks who helped get us in
this mess and then suddenly say, well, this is Obama's economy. That's fine. Give it to me.
My job is to solve problems, not to stand on the sidelines and harp and gripe.
So I welcome the job. I want the responsibility. And I know that -- let's just take an
example. Many questioned our efforts to help save GM and Chrysler from collapse earlier this
year. Their feeling was these companies were driven to the brink by poor management
decisions over a long period of time, and like any business they should be held accountable for
those decisions. I agree that they should be held accountable. But I also recognize the
historic significance and economic prominence of these companies in communities all across
Michigan and all across the country.
I thought about the hundreds of thousands of Americans whose livelihoods are still connected
to the American auto industry, and the impact on an already struggling economy, especially
right here in Michigan. So I said that if Chrysler and GM were willing to fundamentally
restructure their businesses and make the hard choices necessary to become competitive now
and in the future, it was a process worth supporting.
Now today, after a painful period of soul-searching and sacrifice, both GM and Chrysler have
emerged from bankruptcy. Remember, folks said there was no way they could do it? They've
gotten it done already, in record time -- far faster than anybody thought possible. They've
got a leaner structure, they've got new management, and a viable vision of how to compete
and win in the 21st century. Those sacrifices were shared among all the stakeholders:
workers and management; creditors and shareholders; retirees and communities. And
together, they've made the rebirth of Chrysler and GM possible.
It was the right thing to do.
But even with this positive news, the hard truth is, is that some of the jobs that have been
lost in the auto industry and elsewhere won't be coming back. They're the casualties of a
changing economy. In some cases, just increased productivity in the plants themselves
means that some jobs aren't going to return. And that only underscores the importance of
generating new businesses and new industries to replace the ones that we've lost, and of
preparing our workers to fill the jobs they create. For even before this recession hit, we were
faced with an economy that was simply not creating or sustaining enough new, well-paying
jobs.
So now is the time to change all that. What we face is far more than a passing crisis. This is
a transformative moment. And in this moment we must do what other generations have
done. It's not the time to shrink from the challenges we face or put off tough decisions.
That's what Washington has done for decades, and it's exactly why I ran for President -- to
change that mindset. Now is the time to build a firmer, stronger foundation for growth that
will not only withstand future economic storms, but that will help us thrive and compete in a
global economy. To build that foundation, we have to slow the growth of health care costs
that are driving us into debt. We're going to have to do that, and there's going to be a major
debate over the next three weeks. And don't be fooled by folks trying to scare you, saying we
can't change the health care system. We have no choice but to change the health care
system, because right now it's broken for too many Americans.
We're going to have to make tough choices necessary to bring down deficits. But don't let
folks fool you -- the best way to start bringing down deficits is to get control of our health care
costs, which is why we need reform.
Now is the time to create the jobs of the future by growing industries, including a new clean
energy economy. And Jennifer Granholm has been all on top of this as the governor of
Michigan. She is bring cleaning [sic] energy jobs right here to Michigan, and we've got to
support her in that effort.
I want Michigan to build windmills and wind turbines and solar panels and biofuel plants and
energy-efficient light bulbs and weatherize all our -- because, Michigan, you know bad
weather. So you can be all on top of weatherizing. You need to weatherize. I know about
that in Chicago too.
But we also have to ensure that we're educating and preparing our people for the new jobs of
the 21st century. We've got to prepare our people with the skills they need to compete in this
global economy. Time and again, when we placed our bet for the future on education, we
have prospered as a result -- by tapping the incredible innovative and generative potential of
a skilled American workforce. That's what happened when President Lincoln signed into law
legislation creating the land grant colleges, which not only transformed higher education, but
also our entire economy. That's what took place when President Roosevelt signed the GI Bill
which helped educate a generation, and ushered in an era of unprecedented prosperity. That
was the foundation for the American middle class.
And that's why, at the start of my administration I set a goal for America: By 2020, this
nation will once again have the highest proportion of college graduates in the world. We used
to have that. We're going to have it again. And we've begun to take historic steps to achieve
this goal. Already we've increased Pell grants by $500. We've created a $2,500 tax credit for
four years of college tuition. We've simplified student aid applications and ensured that aid is
not based on the income of a job that you just lost. A new GI Bill of Rights for the 21st
century is beginning to help soldiers coming home from Iraq and Afghanistan to begin a new
life -- in a new economy. And the recovery plan has helped close state budget shortfalls --
which put enormous pressure on public universities and community colleges -- at the same
time making historic investments in school libraries and classrooms and facilities all across
America. So we've already taken some steps that are building the foundation for a 21st
century education system here in America, one that will allow us to compete with China and
India and everybody else all around the world.
But today I'm announcing the most significant down payment yet on reaching the goal of
having the highest college graduation rate of any nation in the world. We're going to achieve
this in the next 10 years. And it's called the American Graduation Initiative. It will reform
and strengthen community colleges like this one from coast to coast so they get the resources
that students and schools need -- and the results workers and businesses demand. Through
this plan, we seek to help an additional 5 million Americans earn degrees and certificates in
the next decade -- 5 million.
Not since the passage of the original GI Bill and the work of President Truman's Commission
on Higher Education -- which helped to double the number of community colleges and
increase by seven-fold enrollment in those colleges -- have we taken such a historic step on
behalf of community colleges in America. And let me be clear: We pay for this plan -- this
isn't adding to the deficit; we're paying for this plan -- by ending the wasteful subsidies we
currently provide to banks and private lenders for student loans. That will save tens of billions
of dollars over the next 10 years. Instead of lining the pockets of special interests, it's time
this money went towards the interests of higher education in America. That's what my
administration is committed to doing.
Now, I know that for a long time there have been politicians who have spoken of training as a
silver bullet and college as a cure-all. It's not, and we know that. I can't tell you how many
workers who've been laid off, you talk to them about training and they say, "Training for
what?" So I understand the frustrations that a lot of people have, especially if the training is
not well designed for the specific jobs that are being created out there.
But we know that in the coming years, jobs requiring at least an associate degree are
projected to grow twice as fast as jobs requiring no college experience. We will not fill those
jobs -- or even keep those jobs here in America -- without the training offered by community
colleges. That's why I want to applaud Governor Granholm for the No Worker Left Behind
program. It's providing up to two years' worth of free tuition at community colleges and
universities across the state. The rest of the country should learn from the effort.
This is training to become a medical technician, or a health IT worker, or a lab specialist, or a
nurse. In fact, 59 percent of all new nurses come from community colleges. This is training
to install solar panels and build those wind turbines we were talking about and develop a
smarter electricity grid. And this is the kind of education that more and more Americans are
using to improve their skills and broaden their horizons. Many young people are saving
money by spending two years at community college before heading to a four-year college.
And more workers who have lost their jobs -- or fear losing a job -- are seeking an edge at
schools like this one.
At the same time, community colleges are under increasing pressure to cap enrollments and
scrap courses and cut costs as states and municipalities face budget shortfalls. And this is in
addition to the challenges you face in the best of times, as these schools receive far less
funding per student than typical four-year colleges and universities. So community colleges
are an undervalued asset in our country. Not only is that not right, it's not smart. That's why
I've asked Dr. Jill Biden -- who happens to be a relation of the Vice President, Joe Biden, but
who is also a community college educator for more than 16 years -- to promote community
colleges and help us make community colleges stronger. And that's why we're putting in
place this American Graduation Initiative.
Let me describe for you the specifics of what we're going to do. Number one, we will offer
competitive grants, challenging community colleges to pursue innovative, results-oriented
strategies in exchange for federal funding. We'll fund programs that connect students looking
for jobs with businesses that are looking to hire. We'll challenge these schools to find new
and better ways to help students catch up on the basics, like math and science, that are
essential to our competitiveness. We'll put colleges and employers together to create
programs that match curricula in the classroom with the needs of the boardroom.
These are all kinds of -- there are all kinds of examples of what's possible. We've seen Cisco,
for example, working with community colleges to prepare students and workers for jobs
ranging from work in broadband to health IT. We know that the most successful community
colleges are those that partner with the private sector. So we want to encourage more
companies to work with schools to build these type of relationships. That way, when
somebody goes through a training program, they know that there's a job at the end of that
training.
We'll also create a new research center with a simple mission: to measure what works and
what doesn't. All too often, we don't know what happens when somebody walks out of a
classroom and onto the factory floor or into the library or -- the laboratory or the office. And
that means businesses often can't be sure what a degree is really worth. And schools
themselves don't have the facts to make informed choices about which programs receive --
achieve results and which programs don't. And this is important, not just for businesses and
colleges, but for students and workers, as well. If a parent is going to spend time in the
classroom and away from his or her family -- especially after a long day at work -- that
degree really has to mean something.
They have to know that when they get that degree, this is going to help advance their goals.
If a worker is going to spend two years training to enter into a whole new profession, that
certificate has to mean that he or she is ready, and that businesses are ready to hire.
In addition, we want to propose new funding for innovative strategies that promote not just
enrollment in a community college program, but completion of that program. See, more than
half -- more than half of all students who enter community college to earn an associate
degree, or transfer to a four-year school to earn a bachelor's degree, unfortunately fail to
reach their goal. That's not just a waste of a valuable resource, that's a tragedy for these
students. Oftentimes they've taken out debt and they don't get the degree, but they still have
to pay back the debt. And it's a disaster for our economy.
So we'll fund programs that track student progress inside and outside the classroom. Let's
figure out what's keeping students from crossing that finish line, and then put in place reforms
that will remove those barriers. Maybe it becomes too difficult for a parent to be away from
home, or too expensive for a waiter or a nurse to miss a shift. Maybe a young student just
isn't sure if her education will lead to employment. The point is, we need to figure out
solutions for these kinds of challenges -- because facing these impediments shouldn't prevent
you from reaching your potential.
All right, so that's a big chunk of this first part of this initiative. The second part: We're going
to back $10 billion in loans to renovate and rebuild college classrooms and buildings all across
the country. All too often, community colleges are treated like the stepchild of the higher
education system; they're an afterthought, if they're thought of at all. And that means
schools are often years behind in the facilities they provide, which means, in a 21st century
economy, they're years behind in the education they can offer. That's a mistake and it's one
that we'll help to correct. Through this fund, schools will have the chance to borrow at a more
affordable rate to modernize facilities, and they'll be building on the funds in the recovery plan
that are already helping to renovate schools, including community colleges all across the
country. And by the way, not only does this improve the schools and the training that they're
providing, guess what? You also have to hire some workers and some tradesmen and women
to do the work on those schools. So it means it's putting people to work in Michigan right
here right now.
Number three: Even as we repair bricks and mortar, we have an opportunity to build a new
virtual infrastructure to complement the education and training community colleges can offer.
So we're going to support the creation of a new online, open-source clearinghouse of courses
so that community colleges across the country can offer more classes without building more
classrooms. And this will make a big difference especially for rural campuses that a lot of
times have struggled -- attract -- have to struggle to attract students and faculty. And this
will make it possible for a professor to complement his lecture with an online exercise, or for a
student who can't be away from her family to still keep up with her coursework.
We don't know where this kind of experiment will lead, but that's exactly why we ought to try
it because I think there's a possibility that online education can provide especially for people
who are already in the workforce and want to retrain the chance to upgrade their skills
without having to quit their job.
So let me say this more: The road to recovery, the road to prosperity, is going to be hard. It
was never going to be easy. When I was sworn in, we were seeing 700 [thousand] jobs lost
that month. Then we had the same amount lost for two more consecutive months. Now
we've got an average of about 400,000 jobs lost -- but we're still losing too many jobs. We
will get to the point where we're not losing jobs, but then we've got to start getting to the
point where we're actually creating jobs.
And it's going to take time. There are going to be false starts and there are going to be
setbacks. But I am confident that we can meet the challenges we face, because that's what
we've always done. That's what America does. We hit some challenges, we fuss and argue
about it, and then we go ahead and go about the business of solving our problems. That's
what we see on display right here at Macomb Community College. That's what I've seen at
colleges and universities all across this country. At every juncture in our history when we've
been challenged, we have summoned the resilience and the industriousness -- that can-do
American spirit -- that has allowed us to succeed in the face of even the toughest odds.
That's what we can and must do now, not just to overcome this crisis, but to leave something
better behind, to lay a foundation on which our children and our grandchildren can prosper
and take responsibility for their future -- just as the students at this school, at this difficult
moment, are taking responsibility for theirs.
I am absolutely confident that if I've got your help, that we can make it happen, and we are
going to see a stronger, more prosperous Michigan in the years to come.
Thank you very much, Warren. God bless you. God bless the United States of America.