Your Eminence, Vicki, Kara, Edward, Patrick, Curran, Caroline, members of the Kennedy family,
distinguished guests, and fellow citizens:
Today we say goodbye to the youngest child of Rose and Joseph Kennedy. The world will long remember
their son Edward as the heir to a weighty legacy; a champion for those who had none; the soul of the
Democratic Party; and the lion of the U.S. Senate -- a man whose name graces nearly one thousand laws,
and who penned more than three hundred himself.
But those of us who loved him, and ache with his passing, know Ted Kennedy by the other titles he held:
Father. Brother. Husband. Uncle Teddy, or as he was often known to his younger nieces and nephews,
"The Grand Fromage," or "The Big Cheese." I, like so many others in the city where he worked for nearly
half a century, knew him as a colleague, a mentor, and above all, a friend.
Ted Kennedy was the baby of the family who became its patriarch; the restless dreamer who became its
rock. He was the sunny, joyful child, who bore the brunt of his brothers' teasing, but learned quickly how to
brush it off. When they tossed him off a boat because he didn't know what a jib was, six-year-old Teddy got
back in and learned to sail. When a photographer asked the newly-elected Bobby to step back at a press
conference because he was casting a shadow on his younger brother, Teddy quipped, "It'll be the same in
Washington."
This spirit of resilience and good humor would see Ted Kennedy through more pain and tragedy than most
of us will ever know. He lost two siblings by the age of sixteen. He saw two more taken violently from the
country that loved them. He said goodbye to his beloved sister, Eunice, in the final days of his own life. He
narrowly survived a plane crash, watched two children struggle with cancer, buried three nephews, and
experienced personal failings and setbacks in the most public way possible. 
It is a string of events that would have broken a lesser man. And it would have been easy for Teddy to let
himself become bitter and hardened; to surrender to self-pity and regret; to retreat from public life and live
out his years in peaceful quiet. No one would have blamed him for that.
But that was not Ted Kennedy. As he told us, "...[I]ndividual faults and frailties are no excuse to give in - and
no exemption from the common obligation to give of ourselves." Indeed, Ted was the "Happy Warrior" that
the poet William Wordsworth spoke of when he wrote:
As tempted more; more able to endure,
As more exposed to suffering and distress;
Thence, also, more alive to tenderness.
Through his own suffering, Ted Kennedy became more alive to the plight and suffering of others -- the sick
child who could not see a doctor; the young soldier sent to battle without armor; the citizen denied her rights
because of what she looks like or who she loves or where she comes from. The landmark laws that he
championed -- the Civil Rights Act, the Americans with Disabilities Act, immigration reform, children's health
care, the Family and Medical Leave Act -- all have a running thread. Ted Kennedy's life's work was not to
champion those with wealth or power or special connections. It was to give a voice to those who were not
heard; to add a rung to the ladder of opportunity; to make real the dream of our founding. He was given the
gift of time that his brothers were not, and he used that gift to touch as many lives and right as many wrongs
as the years would allow.
We can still hear his voice bellowing through the Senate chamber, face reddened, fist pounding the podium,
a veritable force of nature, in support of health care or workers' rights or civil rights. And yet, while his
causes became deeply personal, his disagreements never did. While he was seen by his fiercest critics as a
partisan lightning rod, that is not the prism through which Ted Kennedy saw the world, nor was it the prism
through which his colleagues saw him. He was a product of an age when the joy and nobility of politics
prevented differences of party and philosophy from becoming barriers to cooperation and mutual respect --
a time when adversaries still saw each other as patriots.
And that's how Ted Kennedy became the greatest legislator of our time. He did it by hewing to principle, but
also by seeking compromise and common cause -- not through deal-making and horse-trading alone, but
through friendship, and kindness, and humor. There was the time he courted Orrin Hatch's support for the
Children's Health Insurance Program by having his Chief of Staff serenade the Senator with a song Orrin
had written himself; the time he delivered shamrock cookies on a china plate to sweeten up a crusty
Republican colleague; and the famous story of how he won the support of a Texas Committee Chairman on
an immigration bill. Teddy walked into a meeting with a plain manila envelope, and showed only the
Chairman that it was filled with the Texan's favorite cigars. When the negotiations were going well, he would
inch the envelope closer to the Chairman. When they weren't, he would pull it back. Before long, the deal
was done.
It was only a few years ago, on St. Patrick's Day, when Teddy buttonholed me on the floor of the Senate for
my support on a certain piece of legislation that was coming up for vote. I gave him my pledge, but
expressed my skepticism that it would pass. But when the roll call was over, the bill garnered the votes it
needed, and then some. I looked at Teddy with astonishment and asked how he had pulled it off. He just
patted me on the back, and said "Luck of the Irish!"
Of course, luck had little to do with Ted Kennedy's legislative success, and he knew that. A few years ago,
his father-in-law told him that he and Daniel Webster just might be the two greatest senators of all time.
Without missing a beat, Teddy replied, "What did Webster do?"
But though it is Ted Kennedy's historic body of achievements we will remember, it is his giving heart that we
will miss. It was the friend and colleague who was always the first to pick up the phone and say, "I'm sorry
for your loss," or "I hope you feel better," or "What can I do to help?" It was the boss who was so adored by
his staff that over five hundred spanning five decades showed up for his 75th birthday party. It was the man
who sent birthday wishes and thank you notes and even his own paintings to so many who never imagined
that a U.S. Senator would take the time to think about someone like them. I have one of those paintings in
my private study -- a Cape Cod seascape that was a gift to a freshman legislator who happened to admire it
when Ted Kennedy welcomed him into his office the first week he arrived in Washington; by the way, that's
my second favorite gift from Teddy and Vicki after our dog Bo. And it seems like everyone has one of those
stories - the ones that often start with "You wouldn't believe who called me today."
Ted Kennedy was the father who looked after not only his own three children, but John's and Bobby's as
well. He took them camping and taught them to sail. He laughed and danced with them at birthdays and
weddings; cried and mourned with them through hardship and tragedy; and passed on that same sense of
service and selflessness that his parents had instilled in him. Shortly after Ted walked Caroline down the
aisle and gave her away at the altar, he received a note from Jackie that read, "On you the carefree
youngest brother fell a burden a hero would have begged to be spared. We are all going to make it because
you were always there with your love."
Not only did the Kennedy family make it because of Ted's love -- he made it because of theirs; and
especially because of the love and the life he found in Vicki. After so much loss and so much sorrow, it
could not have been easy for Ted Kennedy to risk his heart again. That he did is a testament to how deeply
he loved this remarkable woman from Louisiana. And she didn't just love him back. As Ted would often
acknowledge, Vicki saved him. She gave him strength and purpose; joy and friendship; and stood by him
always, especially in those last, hardest days.
We cannot know for certain how long we have here. We cannot foresee the trials or misfortunes that will test
us along the way. We cannot know God's plan for us.
What we can do is to live out our lives as best we can with purpose, and love, and joy. We can use each
day to show those who are closest to us how much we care about them, and treat others with the kindness
and respect that we wish for ourselves. We can learn from our mistakes and grow from our failures. And we
can strive at all costs to make a better world, so that someday, if we are blessed with the chance to look
back on our time here, we can know that we spent it well; that we made a difference; that our fleeting
presence had a lasting impact on the lives of other human beings.
This is how Ted Kennedy lived. This is his legacy. He once said of his brother Bobby that he need not be
idealized or enlarged in death beyond what he was in life, and I imagine he would say the same about
himself. The greatest expectations were placed upon Ted Kennedy's shoulders because of who he was, but
he surpassed them all because of who he became. We do not weep for him today because of the prestige
attached to his name or his office. We weep because we loved this kind and tender hero who persevered
through pain and tragedy -- not for the sake of ambition or vanity; not for wealth or power; but only for the
people and the country he loved.
In the days after September 11th, Teddy made it a point to personally call each one of the 177 families of
this state who lost a loved one in the attack. But he didn't stop there. He kept calling and checking up on
them. He fought through red tape to get them assistance and grief counseling. He invited them sailing,
played with their children, and would write each family a letter whenever the anniversary of that terrible day
came along. To one widow, he wrote the following:
As you know so well, the passage of time never really heals the tragic memory of such a great loss,
but we carry on, because we have to, because our loved one would want us to, and because there
is still light to guide us in the world from the love they gave us.
We carry on.
Ted Kennedy has gone home now, guided by his faith and by the light of those he has loved and lost. At last
he is with them once more, leaving those of us who grieve his passing with the memories he gave, the good
he did, the dream he kept alive, and a single, enduring image -- the image of a man on a boat; white mane
tousled; smiling broadly as he sails into the wind, ready for what storms may come, carrying on toward
some new and wondrous place just beyond the horizon. May God Bless Ted Kennedy, and may he rest in
eternal peace.
Hello, everybody! Thank you. Thank you. Thank you, everybody. All right, everybody go
ahead and have a seat. How is everybody doing today? How about Tim Spicer? I am here with
students at Wakefield High School in Arlington, Virginia. And we've got students tuning in
from all across America, from kindergarten through 12th grade. And I am just so glad that all
could join us today. And I want to thank Wakefield for being such an outstanding host. Give
yourselves a big round of applause.
I know that for many of you, today is the first day of school. And for those of you in
kindergarten, or starting middle or high school, it's your first day in a new school, so it's
understandable if you're a little nervous. I imagine there are some seniors out there who are
feeling pretty good right now -- with just one more year to go. And no matter what grade
you're in, some of you are probably wishing it were still summer and you could've stayed in
bed just a little bit longer this morning.
I know that feeling. When I was young, my family lived overseas. I lived in Indonesia for a
few years. And my mother, she didn't have the money to send me where all the American kids
went to school, but she thought it was important for me to keep up with an American
education. So she decided to teach me extra lessons herself, Monday through Friday. But
because she had to go to work, the only time she could do it was at 4:30 in the morning.
Now, as you might imagine, I wasn't too happy about getting up that early. And a lot of times,
I'd fall asleep right there at the kitchen table. But whenever I'd complain, my mother would
just give me one of those looks and she'd say, "This is no picnic for me either, buster."
So I know that some of you are still adjusting to being back at school. But I'm here today
because I have something important to discuss with you. I'm here because I want to talk with
you about your education and what's expected of all of you in this new school year.
Now, I've given a lot of speeches about education. And I've talked about responsibility a lot.
I've talked about teachers' responsibility for inspiring students and pushing you to learn.
I've talked about your parents' responsibility for making sure you stay on track, and you get
your homework done, and don't spend every waking hour in front of the TV or with the Xbox.
I've talked a lot about your government's responsibility for setting high standards, and
supporting teachers and principals, and turning around schools that aren't working, where
students aren't getting the opportunities that they deserve.
But at the end of the day, we can have the most dedicated teachers, the most supportive
parents, the best schools in the world -- and none of it will make a difference, none of it will
matter unless all of you fulfill your responsibilities, unless you show up to those schools,
unless you pay attention to those teachers, unless you listen to your parents and
grandparents and other adults and put in the hard work it takes to succeed. That's what I
want to focus on today: the responsibility each of you has for your education.
I want to start with the responsibility you have to yourself. Every single one of you has
something that you're good at. Every single one of you has something to offer. And you have
a responsibility to yourself to discover what that is. That's the opportunity an education can
provide.
Maybe you could be a great writer -- maybe even good enough to write a book or articles in a
newspaper -- but you might not know it until you write that English paper -- that English class
paper that's assigned to you. Maybe you could be an innovator or an inventor -- maybe even
good enough to come up with the next iPhone or the new medicine or vaccine -- but you
might not know it until you do your project for your science class. Maybe you could be a
mayor or a senator or a Supreme Court justice -- but you might not know that until you join
student government or the debate team.
And no matter what you want to do with your life, I guarantee that you'll need an education to
do it. You want to be a doctor, or a teacher, or a police officer? You want to be a nurse or an
architect, a lawyer or a member of our military? You're going to need a good education for
every single one of those careers. You cannot drop out of school and just drop into a good job.
You've got to train for it and work for it and learn for it.
And this isn't just important for your own life and your own future. What you make of your
education will decide nothing less than the future of this country. The future of America
depends on you. What you're learning in school today will determine whether we as a nation
can meet our greatest challenges in the future.
You'll need the knowledge and problem-solving skills you learn in science and math to cure
diseases like cancer and AIDS, and to develop new energy technologies and protect our
environment. You'll need the insights and critical-thinking skills you gain in history and social
studies to fight poverty and homelessness, crime and discrimination, and make our nation
more fair and more free. You'll need the creativity and ingenuity you develop in all your
classes to build new companies that will create new jobs and boost our economy.
We need every single one of you to develop your talents and your skills and your intellect so
you can help us old folks solve our most difficult problems. If you don't do that -- if you quit
on school -- you're not just quitting on yourself, you're quitting on your country.
Now, I know it's not always easy to do well in school. I know a lot of you have challenges in
your lives right now that can make it hard to focus on your schoolwork.
I get it. I know what it's like. My father left my family when I was two years old, and I was
raised by a single mom who had to work and who struggled at times to pay the bills and
wasn't always able to give us the things that other kids had. There were times when I missed
having a father in my life. There were times when I was lonely and I felt like I didn't fit in.
So I wasn't always as focused as I should have been on school, and I did some things I'm not
proud of, and I got in more trouble than I should have. And my life could have easily taken a
turn for the worse.
But I was -- I was lucky. I got a lot of second chances, and I had the opportunity to go to
college and law school and follow my dreams. My wife, our First Lady Michelle Obama, she has
a similar story. Neither of her parents had gone to college, and they didn't have a lot of
money. But they worked hard, and she worked hard, so that she could go to the best schools
in this country.
Some of you might not have those advantages. Maybe you don't have adults in your life who
give you the support that you need. Maybe someone in your family has lost their job and
there's not enough money to go around. Maybe you live in a neighborhood where you don't
feel safe, or have friends who are pressuring you to do things you know aren't right.
But at the end of the day, the circumstances of your life -- what you look like, where you
come from, how much money you have, what you've got going on at home -- none of that is
an excuse for neglecting your homework or having a bad attitude in school. That's no excuse
for talking back to your teacher, or cutting class, or dropping out of school. There is no excuse
for not trying.
Where you are right now doesn't have to determine where you'll end up. No one's written your
destiny for you, because here in America, you write your own destiny. You make your own
future.
That's what young people like you are doing every day, all across America.
Young people like Jazmin Perez, from Roma, Texas. Jazmin didn't speak English when she first
started school. Neither of her parents had gone to college. But she worked hard, earned good
grades, and got a scholarship to Brown University -- is now in graduate school, studying
public health, on her way to becoming Dr. Jazmin Perez.
I'm thinking about Andoni Schultz, from Los Altos, California, who's fought brain cancer since
he was three. He's had to endure all sorts of treatments and surgeries, one of which affected
his memory, so it took him much longer -- hundreds of extra hours -- to do his schoolwork.
But he never fell behind. He's headed to college this fall.
And then there's Shantell Steve, from my hometown of Chicago, Illinois. Even when bouncing
from foster home to foster home in the toughest neighborhoods in the city, she managed to
get a job at a local health care center, start a program to keep young people out of gangs,
and she's on track to graduate high school with honors and go on to college.
And Jazmin, Andoni, and Shantell aren't any different from any of you. They face challenges in
their lives just like you do. In some cases they've got it a lot worse off than many of you. But
they refused to give up. They chose to take responsibility for their lives, for their education,
and set goals for themselves. And I expect all of you to do the same.
That's why today I'm calling on each of you to set your own goals for your education -- and do
everything you can to meet them. Your goal can be something as simple as doing all your
homework, paying attention in class, or spending some time each day reading a book. Maybe
you'll decide to get involved in an extracurricular activity, or volunteer in your community.
Maybe you'll decide to stand up for kids who are being teased or bullied because of who they
are or how they look, because you believe, like I do, that all young people deserve a safe
environment to study and learn. Maybe you'll decide to take better care of yourself so you can
be more ready to learn. And along those lines, by the way, I hope all of you are washing your
hands a lot, and that you stay home from school when you don't feel well, so we can keep
people from getting the flu this fall and winter.
But whatever you resolve to do, I want you to commit to it. I want you to really work at it.
I know that sometimes you get that sense from TV that you can be rich and successful
without any hard work -- that your ticket to success is through rapping or basketball or being
a reality TV star. Chances are you're not going to be any of those things.
The truth is, being successful is hard. You won't love every subject that you study. You won't
click with every teacher that you have. Not every homework assignment will seem completely
relevant to your life right at this minute. And you won't necessarily succeed at everything the
first time you try.
That's okay. Some of the most successful people in the world are the ones who've had the
most failures. J.K. Rowling's -- who wrote Harry Potter -- her first Harry Potter book was
rejected 12 times before it was finally published. Michael Jordan was cut from his high school
basketball team. He lost hundreds of games and missed thousands of shots during his career.
But he once said, "I have failed over and over and over again in my life. And that's why I
succeed."
These people succeeded because they understood that you can't let your failures define you --
you have to let your failures teach you. You have to let them show you what to do differently
the next time. So if you get into trouble, that doesn't mean you're a troublemaker, it means
you need to try harder to act right. If you get a bad grade, that doesn't mean you're stupid, it
just means you need to spend more time studying.
No one's born being good at all things. You become good at things through hard work. You're
not a varsity athlete the first time you play a new sport. You don't hit every note the first time
you sing a song. You've got to practice. The same principle applies to your schoolwork. You
might have to do a math problem a few times before you get it right. You might have to read
something a few times before you understand it. You definitely have to do a few drafts of a
paper before it's good enough to hand in.
Don't be afraid to ask questions. Don't be afraid to ask for help when you need it. I do that
every day. Asking for help isn't a sign of weakness, it's a sign of strength because it shows
you have the courage to admit when you don't know something, and that then allows you to
learn something new. So find an adult that you trust -- a parent, a grandparent or teacher, a
coach or a counselor -- and ask them to help you stay on track to meet your goals.
And even when you're struggling, even when you're discouraged, and you feel like other
people have given up on you, don't ever give up on yourself, because when you give up on
yourself, you give up on your country.
The story of America isn't about people who quit when things got tough. It's about people who
kept going, who tried harder, who loved their country too much to do anything less than their
best.
It's the story of students who sat where you sit 250 years ago, and went on to wage a
revolution and they founded this nation. Young people. Students who sat where you sit 75
years ago who overcame a Depression and won a world war; who fought for civil rights and
put a man on the moon. Students who sat where you sit 20 years ago who founded Google
and Twitter and Facebook and changed the way we communicate with each other.
So today, I want to ask all of you, what's your contribution going to be? What problems are
you going to solve? What discoveries will you make? What will a President who comes here in
20 or 50 or 100 years say about what all of you did for this country?
Now, your families, your teachers, and I are doing everything we can to make sure you have
the education you need to answer these questions. I'm working hard to fix up your classrooms
and get you the books and the equipment and the computers you need to learn. But you've
got to do your part, too. So I expect all of you to get serious this year. I expect you to put
your best effort into everything you do. I expect great things from each of you. So don't let us
down. Don't let your family down or your country down. Most of all, don't let yourself down.
Make us all proud.
Thank you very much, everybody.
God bless you. God bless America.
Thank you.
