Hey, Chicago! Hello, Chicago! Hello, everybody. Hello, Hyde Park! It is good to be home! It is
good to be home! Everybody have a seat. You all relax. It’s just me. You all know me. It is
good to be back home.
A couple of people I want to acknowledge -- first of all, I want to thank your Mayor, my great
friend, Rahm Emanuel for his outstanding leadership of the city and his kind introduction. I
want to thank everybody here at Hyde Park Academy for welcoming me here today.
I want to acknowledge your principal and your assistant principal -- although, they really
make me feel old, because when I saw them -- where are they? Where are they? Stand up.
Stand up. They are doing outstanding work. We’re very, very proud them. But you do make
me feel old. Sit down.
A couple other people I want to acknowledge -- Governor Pat Quinn is here doing great work
down in Springfield. My great friend and senior Senator Dick Durbin is in the house.
Congressman Bobby Rush is here. We’re in his district. Attorney General and former
seatmate of mine when I was in the state senate, Lisa Madigan. County Board President --
used to be my alderwoman -- Tony Preckwinkle in the house.And I’ve got -- I see a lot of reverend clergy here, but I’m not going to mention them,
because if I miss one I’m in trouble. They’re all friends of mine. They’ve been knowing me.
Some people may not know this, but obviously, this is my old neighborhood. I used to teach
right around the corner. This is where Michelle and I met, where we fell in love -- This is where we raised our daughters, in a house just about a mile away
from here -- less than a mile. And that’s really what I’ve come here to talk about today --
raising our kids. I love you, too. I love you, too.
I’m here to make sure that we talk about and then work towards giving every child every
chance in life; building stronger communities and new ladders of opportunity that they can
climb into the middle class and beyond; and, most importantly, keeping them safe from harm.
Michelle was born and raised here -- a proud daughter of the South Side. Last weekend, she
came home, but it was to attend the funeral of Hadiya Pendleton. And Hadiya’s parents, by
the way, are here -- and I want to just acknowledge them. They are just wonderful, wonderful
people.
And as you know, this week, in my State of the Union, I talked about Hadiya on Tuesday night
and the fact that unfortunately what happened to Hadiya is not unique. It's not unique to
Chicago. It's not unique to this country. Too many of our children are being taken away from
us.
Two months ago, America mourned 26 innocent first-graders and their educators in Newtown.
And today, I had the high honor of giving the highest civilian award I can give to the parent --
or the families of the educators who had been killed in Newtown. And there was something
profound and uniquely heartbreaking and tragic, obviously, about a group of 6-year-olds being
killed. But last year, there were 443 murders with a firearm on the streets of this city, and 65
of those victims were 18 and under. So that’s the equivalent of a Newtown every four months.
And that’s precisely why the overwhelming majority of Americans are asking for some
common-sense proposals to make it harder for criminals to get their hands on a gun. And as I
said on Tuesday night, I recognize not everybody agrees with every issue. There are regional
differences. The experience of gun ownership is different in urban areas than it is in rural
areas, different from upstate and downstate Illinois.But these proposals deserve a vote in Congress. They deserve a vote. They deserve a vote.
And I want to thank those members of Congress who are working together in a serious way to
try to address this issue.
But I’ve also said no law or set of laws can prevent every senseless act of violence in this
country. When a child opens fire on another child, there’s a hole in that child’s heart that
government can't fill -- only community and parents and teachers and clergy can fill that hole.
In too many neighborhoods today -- whether here in Chicago or the farthest reaches of rural
America -- it can feel like for a lot of young people the future only extends to the next street
corner or the outskirts of town; that no matter how much you work or how hard you try, your
destiny was determined the moment you were born. There are entire neighborhoods where
young people, they don’t see an example of somebody succeeding. And for a lot of young
boys and young men, in particular, they don’t see an example of fathers or grandfathers,
uncles, who are in a position to support families and be held up and respected.
And so that means that this is not just a gun issue. It’s also an issue of the kinds of
communities that we’re building. And for that, we all share a responsibility, as citizens, to fix
it. We all share a responsibility to move this country closer to our founding vision that no
matter who you are, or where you come from, here in America, you can decide your own
destiny. You can succeed if you work hard and fulfill your responsibilities.
Now, that means we’ve got to grow our economy and create more good jobs. It means we’ve
got to equip every American with the skills and the training to fill those jobs. And it means
we’ve got to rebuild ladders of opportunity for everybody willing to climb them.
Now, that starts at home. There’s no more important ingredient for success, nothing that
would be more important for us reducing violence than strong, stable families -- which means
we should do more to promote marriage and encourage fatherhood. Don’t get me wrong -- as
the son of a single mom, who gave everything she had to raise me with the help of my
grandparents, I turned out okay. But -- no, no, but I think it’s -- so we’ve got single moms
out here, they’re heroic in what they’re doing and we are so proud of them. But at the same
time, I wish I had had a father who was around and involved. Loving, supportive parents --
and, by the way, that’s all kinds of parents -- that includes foster parents, and that includes
grandparents, and extended families; it includes gay or straight parents.
Those parents supporting kids -- that’s the single most important thing. Unconditional love for
your child -- that makes a difference. If a child grows up with parents who have work, and
have some education, and can be role models, and can teach integrity and responsibility, and
discipline and delayed gratification -- all those things give a child the kind of foundation that
allows them to say, my future, I can make it what I want. And we’ve got to make sure that
every child has that, and in some cases, we may have to fill the gap and the void if children
don’t have that.So we should encourage marriage by removing the financial disincentives for couples who love
one another but may find it financially disadvantageous if they get married. We should reform
our child support laws to get more men working and engaged with their children. And my
Administration will continue to work with the faith community and the private sector this year
on a campaign to encourage strong parenting and fatherhood. Because what makes you a
man is not the ability to make a child, it’s the courage to raise one.
We also know, though, that there is no surer path to success in the middle class than a good
education. And what we now know is that that has to begin in the earliest years. Study after
study shows that the earlier a child starts learning, the more likely they are to succeed -- the
more likely they are to do well at Hyde Park Academy; the more likely they are to graduate;
the more likely they are to get a good job; the more likely they are to form stable families and
then be able to raise children themselves who get off to a good start.
Chicago already has a competition, thanks to what the Mayor is doing, that rewards the best
preschools in the city -- so Rahm has already prioritized this. But what I’ve also done is say,
let’s give every child across America access to high-quality, public preschool. Every child, not
just some. Every dollar we put into early childhood education can save $7 down the road by
boosting graduation rates, reducing teen pregnancy, reducing violent crime, reducing the
welfare rolls, making sure that folks who have work, now they’re paying taxes. All this stuff
pays back huge dividends if we make the investment. So let’s make this happen. Let’s make
sure every child has the chance they deserve.
As kids go through school, we’ll recruit new math and science teachers to make sure that
they’ve got the skills that the future demands. We’ll help more young people in low-income
neighborhoods get summer jobs. We’ll redesign our high schools and encourage our kids to
stay in high school, so that the diploma they get leads directly to a good job once they
graduate.
Right here in Chicago, five new high schools have partnered with companies and community
colleges to prepare our kids with the skills that businesses are looking for right now. And your
College to Careers program helps community college students get access to the same kinds of
real-world experiences. So we know what works. Let’s just do it in more places. Let’s reach
more young people. Let’s give more kids a chance.
So we know how important families are. We know how important education is. We recognize
that government alone can’t solve these problems of violence and poverty, that everybody
has to be involved. But we also have to remember that the broader economic environment of
communities is critical as well. For example, we need to make sure that folks who are working
now, often in the hardest jobs, see their work rewarded with wages that allow them to raise a
family without falling into poverty.Today, a family with two kids that works hard and relies on a minimum wage salary still lives
below the poverty line. That’s wrong, and we should fix it. We should reward an honest day’s
work with honest wages. And that's why we should raise the minimum wage to $9 an hour
and make it a wage you can live on.
And even though some cities have bounced back pretty quickly from the recession, we know
that there are communities and neighborhoods within cities or in small towns that haven’t
bounced back. Cities like Chicago are ringed with former factory towns that never came back
all the way from plants packing up; there are pockets of poverty where young adults are still
looking for their first job.
And that’s why on Tuesday I announced -- and that's part of what I want to focus on here in
Chicago and across the country -- is my intention to partner with 20 of the hardest-hit
communities in America to get them back in the game -- get them back in the game.
First, we’ll work with local leaders to cut through red tape and improve things like public
safety and education and housing. And we’ll bring all the resources to bear in a coordinated
fashion so that we can get that tipping point where suddenly a community starts feeling like
things are changing and we can come back.
Second of all, if you’re willing to play a role in a child’s education, then we’ll help you reform
your schools. We want to seed more and more partnerships of the kind that Rahm is trying to
set up.
Third, we’re going to help bring jobs and growth to hard-hit neighborhoods by giving tax
breaks to business owners who invest and hire in those neighborhoods.
Fourth, and specific to the issue of violence -- because it’s very hard to develop economically
if people don't feel safe. If they don't feel like they can walk down the street and shop at a
store without getting hit over head or worse, then commerce dries up, businesses don't want
to locate, families move out, you get into the wrong cycle. So we’re going to target
neighborhoods struggling to deal with violent crime and help them reduce that violence in
ways that have been proven to work. And I know this is a priority of your Mayor’s; it’s going
to be a priority of mine.
And finally, we’re going to keep working in communities all across the country, including here
in Chicago, to replace run-down public housing that doesn’t offer much hope or safety with
new, healthy homes for low- and moderate-income families.
And here in Woodlawn, you’ve seen some of the progress that we can make when we come
together to rebuild our neighborhoods, and attract new businesses, and improve our schools.
Woodlawn is not all the way where it needs to be, but thanks to wonderful institutions like
Apostolic Church, we’ve made great progress.So we want to help more communities follow your example. And let’s go even farther by
offering incentives to companies that hire unemployed Americans who have got what it takes
to fill a job opening, but they may have been out of work so long that nobody is willing to give
them a chance right now. Let’s put our people back to work rebuilding vacant homes in need
of repair. Young people can get experience -- apprenticeships, learn a trade. And we’re
removing blight from our community.
If we gather together what works, we can extend more ladders of opportunity for anybody
who’s working to build a strong, middle-class life for themselves. Because in America, your
destiny shouldn’t be determined by where you live, where you were born. It should be
determined by how big you’re willing to dream, how much effort and sweat and tears you’re
willing to put in to realizing that dream.
When I first moved to Chicago -- before any of the students in this room were born -- and a
whole lot of people who are in the audience remember me from those days, I lived in a
community on the South Side right up the block, but I also worked further south where
communities had been devastated by some of the steel plants closing. And my job was to
work with churches and laypeople and local leaders to rebuild neighborhoods, and improve
schools, and help young people who felt like they had nowhere to turn.
And those of you who worked with me, Reverend Love, you remember, it wasn’t easy.
Progress didn’t come quickly. Sometimes I got so discouraged I thought about just giving up.
But what kept me going was the belief that with enough determination and effort and
persistence and perseverance, change is always possible; that we may not be able to help
everybody, but if we help a few then that propels progress forward. We may not be able to
save every child from gun violence, but if we save a few, that starts changing the atmosphere
in our communities. We may not be able to get everybody a job right away, but if we get a
few folks a job, then everybody starts feeling a little more hopeful and a little more
encouraged. Neighborhood by neighborhood, one block by one block, one family at a time.
Now, this is what I had a chance to talk about when I met with some young men from Hyde
Park Academy who were participating in this B.A.M. program. Where are the guys I talked to?
Stand up you all, so we can all see you guys. So these are some -- these are all some
exceptional young men, and I couldn't be prouder of them. And the reason I'm proud of them
is because a lot of them have had some issues. That's part of the reason why you guys are in
the program.
But what I explained to them was I had issues too when I was their age. I just had an
environment that was a little more forgiving. So when I screwed up, the consequences
weren't as high as when kids on the South Side screw up. So I had more of a safety net. But
these guys are no different than me, and we had that conversation about what does it take to
change. And the same thing that it takes for us individually to change, I said to them, well,
that's what it takes for communities to change. That's what it takes for countries to change.
It's not easy.But it does require us, first of all, having a vision about where we want to be. It requires us
recognizing that it will be hard work getting there. It requires us being able to overcome and
persevere in the face of roadblocks and disappointments and failures. It requires us reflecting
internally about who we are and what we believe in, and facing up to our own fears and
insecurities, and admitting when we're wrong. And that same thing that we have to do in our
individual lives that these guys talked about, that's what we have to do for our communities.
And it will not be easy, but it can be done.
When Hadiya Pendleton and her classmates visited Washington three weeks ago, they spent
time visiting the monuments -- including the Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial just off the
National Mall. And that memorial stands as a tribute to everything Dr. King achieved in his
lifetime. But it also reminds us of how hard that work was and how many disappointments he
experienced. He was here in Chicago fighting poverty, and just like a lot of us, there were
times where he felt like he was losing hope. So in some ways, that memorial is a testament
not to work that's completed, but it’s a testament to the work that remains unfinished.
His goal was to free us not only from the shackles of discrimination, but from the shadow of
poverty that haunts too many of our communities, the self-destructive impulses, and the
mindless violence that claims so many lives of so many innocent young people.
These are difficult challenges. No solution we offer will be perfect. But perfection has never
been our goal. Our goal has been to try and make whatever difference we can. Our goal has
been to engage in the hard but necessary work of bringing America one step closer to the
nation we know we can be.
If we do that, if we’re striving with every fiber of our being to strengthen our middle class, to
extend ladders of opportunity for everybody who is trying as hard as they can to create a
better life for themselves; if we do everything in our power to keep our children safe from
harm; if we’re fulfilling our obligations to one another and to future generations; if we make
that effort, then I’m confident -- I’m confident that we will write the next great chapter in our
American story. I’m not going to be able to do it by myself, though. Nobody can. We’re going
to have to do it together.
Thank you, everybody.
God bless you.
God bless the United States of America.

Hello, Newport News! Well, it is good to see all of you here today.
I want to thank your CEO, Mike Petters, for showing me around. I usually don’t get a chance
to hang out with nuclear submarines, especially submarines that my wife has sponsored. So
right there, that was worth the trip.
But most importantly, it’s a great chance to see the incredible men and women who, every
single day, are helping to keep America safe and are just the bedrock of this country’s
manufacturing base. Thank you to all of you.
I want to thank our outstanding Secretary of the Navy, Ray Mabus, who’s here. There he is
right there -- the good-looking guy over at the end. I want to thank your Mayor, McKinley
Price, who served this nation bravely in the U.S. Army. I want to thank two outstanding
Congressmen who care about this facility, care about Virginia and care about the country --
Congressman Bobby Scott is here -- and Congressman Scott Rigell is here as well.
Now, the reason I came here today, in addition to seeing just some incredible stuff -- it’s true,
every time I come to these places, I don't know how you all do it. It is just amazing work. But the main reason I'm here is to call attention to the important work that you’re doing on
behalf of the nation’s defense, and to let the American people know that this work, along with
hundreds of thousands of jobs, are currently in jeopardy because of politics in Washington.
In a few days, Congress might allow a series of immediate, painful, arbitrary budget cuts to
take place -- known in Washington as the sequester. Now, that's a pretty bad name --
sequester. But the effects are even worse than the name. Instead of cutting out the
government spending we don’t need -- wasteful programs that don't work, special interest tax
loopholes and tax breaks -- what the sequester does is it uses a meat cleaver approach to gut
critical investments in things like education and national security and lifesaving medical
research.
And the impact of this policy won’t be felt overnight, but it will be real. The sequester will
weaken America’s economic recovery. It will weaken our military readiness. And it will
weaken the basic services that the American people depend on every single day.
Already, the uncertainty around these cuts is having an effect. Companies are starting to
prepare for layoff notices. Families are preparing to cut back on expenses. And the longer
these cuts are in place, the greater the damage.
So here at Newport News Shipbuilding, you guys have made an enormous investment,
because we've said in order to maintain the finest Navy that the world has ever known we've
got to make sure that there is an orderly process whereby we are continually upgrading our
ships, building new ships, maintaining our ships properly. And these are some big ships. So
it’s expensive, and it’s complicated. And you’ve got 5,000 suppliers all across the country,
and you've got to have some certainty and some knowledge about how things are going to
proceed over the long term for Mike and others to plan properly.

So you're rightly concerned. Mike is properly concerned about the impact that these cuts will
have on not just this company, but companies and small businesses from all 50 states that
supply you with parts and equipment.
Mike was telling me that you guys have already made a billion dollars’ worth of capital
investment. You've got half a billion dollars in training costs as you recruit and hire new
people. Well, those aren't commitments that you make lightly. You've got to have the
capacity to plan and have some certainty in terms of what it is that we're going to be doing.
And you know that if Congress can’t get together and plan our nation’s finances for the long
term, that over time some of your jobs and businesses could be at risk.
Over at the Norfolk Naval Station, the threat of these cuts has already forced the Navy to
cancel the deployment, or delay the repair of certain aircraft carriers. One that’s currently
being built might not get finished. Another carrier might not get started at all. And that hurts
your bottom line. That hurts this community. Because of these automatic cuts, about 90,000 Virginians who work for the Department of
Defense would be forced to take unpaid leave from their jobs. So that’s money out of their
pockets, money out of their paychecks. And then that means there’s going to be a ripple
effect on thousands of other jobs and businesses and services throughout the Commonwealth,
because if they don’t have money in their pockets or less money in their pockets, that means
they're less able to afford to buy goods and services from other businesses. So it's not just
restricted to the defense industry.
All told, the sequester could cost tens of thousands of jobs right here in Virginia. But it
doesn’t just stop there. If the sequester goes into effect, more than 2,000 college students
would lose their financial aid. Early education like Head Start and Early Start would be
eliminated for nearly 1,000 children, and around 18,000 fewer Virginians would get the skills
and training they need to find a job.
Across the country, these cuts will force federal prosecutors to close cases and potentially let
criminals go. Air traffic controllers and airport security will see cutbacks, and that could cause
delays at airports across the country. Tens of thousands of parents will have to scramble to
find child care for their kids. Hundreds of thousands of Americans will lose access to primary
care and preventive care like flu vaccinations and cancer screenings, including more than
3,500 children right here in Virginia.
So these cuts are wrong. They’re not smart. They’re not fair. They’re a self-inflicted wound
that doesn’t have to happen.
Now, the reason that we're even thinking about the sequester is because people are rightly
concerned about the deficit and the debt. But there is a sensible way of doing things and
there is a dumb way of doing things. I mean, think about your own family. Let's say that
suddenly you've got a little less money coming in. Are you going to say, well, we'll cut out
college tuition for the kid, we'll stop feeding the little guy over here, we won't pay our car note
even though that means we can't get to work -- that’s not what you do, right?
You step back and you say, what is it that's important -- our child's education, making sure
they're healthy, making sure we can get to the job, keeping our house repaired? And then
you say, here are the things that aren't so important and you cut those out. You prioritize,
and you make smart decisions. Well, we should be doing the same thing.
Now, I’ve laid out a plan that details how we can pay down our deficit in a way that’s balanced
and responsible. We have the plan right on a website, the White House website. Everybody
can go see it. It details exactly how we can cut programs that don't work, how we can raise
money by closing loopholes that are only serving a few, as opposed to the average American.
We detailed $930 billion in sensible spending cuts that we’re willing to make and $580 billion
in wasteful tax loopholes and deductions that we’re willing to eliminate through tax reform. And what I've said is if the Republicans in Congress don’t like every detail of my proposal,
which I don't expect them to, I’ve told them my door is open. I am more than willing to
negotiate. I want to compromise. There's no reason why we can't come together and find a
sensible way to reduce the deficit over the long term without affecting vital services, without
hurting families, without impacting outstanding facilities like this one and our national
defense. There's a way of doing this.
And the fact is there are leaders in both parties throughout this country who want to do the
same. I've got to give Scott Rigell credit. He is one of your Republican congressmen who’s
with us here today -- and that's not always healthy for a Republican, being with me. But the
reason he’s doing it is because he knows it's important to you. And he’s asked his colleagues
in the House to consider closing tax loopholes instead of letting these automatic cuts go
through. He’s concerned about the deficit, and he’s more than prepared to make some really
tough cuts, but he wants to do it in a smart way.
Bobby Scott -- same thing. Some of the cuts we've proposed, Bobby might not think are
perfect, but he knows that we've got to make some tough decisions. He just wants to make
sure that you aren't the ones who are adversely impacted and that we're sharing the sacrifice
in bringing down our deficit; we're not just dumping it on a few people and we're not doing it
in a dumb way.
Senators like John McCain have made similar statements to what Scott said. Your Republican
Governor along with other governors around the country have said they want Congress to
stop the sequester, to stop these cuts.
But I just have to be honest with you. There are too many Republicans in Congress right now
who refuse to compromise even an inch when it comes to closing tax loopholes and special
interest tax breaks. And that's what's holding things up right now.
Keep in mind, nobody is asking them to raise income tax rates. All we’re asking is to consider
closing tax loopholes and deductions that the Speaker of the House, John Boehner, said he
was willing to do just a few months ago. He said there were a bunch of loopholes and
deductions you could close. He said you could raise $800 billion, a trillion dollars by closing
loopholes.
Well, we're not even asking for that much. All we're asking is that they close loopholes for the
well-off and the well-connected -- for hedge fund managers, or oil companies, or corporate jet
owners who are all doing very well and don’t need these tax loopholes -- so we can avoid
laying off workers, or kicking kids off Head Start, or reducing financial aid for college
students.
I don’t think that’s too much to ask. I do not think that is partisan. The majority of the
American people agree with me. The majority of Newport News agrees with me. We need to
get this done.But the choice is up to Congress. Only Congress has the power to pass a law that stops these
damaging cuts and replaces them with smart savings and tax reform. And the second I get
that bill on my desk, I will sign it into law. But I've got to get Congress to pass it.
None of us will get 100 percent of what we want. Democrats, they've got to make some
tough choices too. Democrats like me, we've said we're prepared to make some tough cuts
and reforms, including to programs like Medicare. But if we're willing to compromise, then
Republicans in the House have to compromise as well. That’s what democracy is about.
That’s what this country needs right now.
So let me just make one last point, by the way, for those of you who are following this. Now,
lately, some people have been saying, well, maybe we'll just give the President some
flexibility. He could make the cuts the way he wants and that way it won't be as damaging.
The problem is when you're cutting $85 billion in seven months, which represents over a 10-
percent cut in the defense budget in seven months, there's no smart way to do that. There's
no smart way to do that. You don't want to have to choose between, let's see, do I close
funding for the disabled kid, or the poor kid? Do I close this Navy shipyard or some other
one? When you're doing things in a way that's not smart, you can't gloss over the pain and
the impact it's going to have on the economy.
And the broader point is, Virginia, we can’t just cut our way to prosperity. We can’t just cut
our way to prosperity. We can't ask seniors and working families like yours to shoulder the
entire burden of deficit reduction while asking nothing more from the wealthiest and the most
powerful. We're not going to grow the middle class just by shifting the cost of health care or
college onto families that are already struggling, or forcing communities to lay off more
teachers or cops or firefighters or shipbuilders, and then folks who are doing really well don’t
have to do anything more. That’s not fair, and it's not good for the economy.
And the other thing we've got to do is to stop having these crises manufactured every month.
It seems like -- I know you guys must get tired of it. Didn’t we just solve this thing? Now
we've got another thing coming up? I mean, think about if Mike Petters ran his business this
way -- once every month or two there would be some crisis, and you wouldn’t be sure
whether or not you were working or not. Even if it got solved eventually or ultimately, it
would be pretty discouraging on people. You would be less productive. Ships wouldn’t get
built as fast. You would waste money because you don’t know exactly what to expect. Folks
aren't sure, am I showing up to work today, or not?
If it's not a good way to run a business, it's sure not a good way to run a country.
Now, all of you, the American people, you’ve worked too hard for too long rebuilding and
digging our way out of the financial crisis back in 2007 and 2008 just to see Congress cause
another one. The greatest nation on Earth can't keep on conducting its business drifting from
one crisis to the next.We've got to have a plan. We've got to invest in our common future. Our true north is a
growing economy that creates good middle-class jobs; a country that provides its people with
the skills they need to get those jobs and make sure that you're getting paid a decent wage
for working hard so you can support your families. That’s what we should be focused on right
now. Not weakening the economy. Not laying people off.
That’s what we should be talking about in Washington. And if you agree with me, I need you
to make sure your voices are heard. Let your leaders know what you expect of them. Let
them know what you believe. Let them know that what this country was built on was a sense
of obligation to not just each other but to future generations; that we've got to shoulder those
obligations as one nation, and as one people.
I was in a conversation with some of the governors from across the country yesterday and I
told them, I said, I've run my last election. Michelle is very happy about that. I'm not
interested in spin; I'm not interested in playing a blame game. At this point, all I'm interested
in is just solving problems. All I'm interested in is making sure that when you get up early in
the morning, and get to this ship at 5:30 in the morning, that you know if you do a good job
and if you work hard and if you're making sure that all the parts to this incredible ship that
you're building are where they need to be -- if you're doing what you do, then you can go
home feeling satisfied, I did my job, I did my part, I can support my family, I can take pride in
what I've done for this country.
That’s all I want. I want us to be able to look back five years from now, 10 years from now,
and say we took care of our business and we put an end to some of these games that maybe,
I guess, are entertaining for some but are hurting too many people.
But in order for us to make that happen I'm going to need you. The one thing about being
President is, after four years you get pretty humble. You’d think maybe you wouldn't, but
actually you become more humble. You realize what you don't know. You realize all the
mistakes you’ve made. But you also realize you can't do things by yourself. That's not how
our system works. You’ve got to have the help and the goodwill of Congress, and what that
means is you’ve got to make sure that constituents of members of Congress are putting some
pressure on them, making sure they’re doing the right thing, putting an end to some of these
political games.
So I need you, Virginia, to keep up the pressure. I need you to keep up the effort. I need
you to keep up the fight. If you do, Congress will listen. If you stand up and speak out,
Congress will listen. And together, we will unleash our true potential, and we'll remind the
world just why it is the United States builds the greatest ships on Earth and is the greatest
nation on Earth.
Thank you. God bless you. God bless the United States of America.