Thank you so much. Thank you for this wonderful welcome. Thank you to the people of Prague. Thank you
to the people of the Czech Republic. Today, I'm proud to stand here with you in the middle of this great city,
in the center of Europe. And, to paraphrase one of my predecessors, I am also proud to be the man who
brought Michelle Obama to Prague.1
To Mr. President, Mr. Prime Minister, to all the dignitaries who are here, thank you for your extraordinary
hospitality. And to the people of the Czech Republic, thank you for your friendship to the United States.
I've learned over many years to appreciate the good company and the good humor of the Czech people in
my hometown of Chicago. Behind me is a statue of a hero of the Czech people -- Tomas Masaryk. In 1918,
after America had pledged its support for Czech independence, Masaryk spoke to a crowd in Chicago that
was estimated to be over 100,000. I don't think I can match his record -- but I am honored to follow his
footsteps from Chicago to Prague.
For over a thousand years, Prague has set itself apart from any other city in any other place. You've known
war and peace. You've seen empires rise and fall. You've led revolutions in the arts and science, in politics
and in poetry. Through it all, the people of Prague have insisted on pursuing their own path, and defining
their own destiny. And this city -- this Golden City which is both ancient and youthful -- stands as a living
monument to your unconquerable spirit.
When I was born, the world was divided, and our nations were faced with very different circumstances. Few
people would have predicted that someone like me would one day become the President of the United
States. Few people would have predicted that an American President would one day be permitted to speak
to an audience like this in Prague. Few would have imagined that the Czech Republic would become a free
nation, a member of NATO, a leader of a united Europe. Those ideas would have been dismissed as
dreams.
We are here today because enough people ignored the voices who told them that the world could not
change.
We're here today because of the courage of those who stood up and took risks to say that freedom is a right
for all people, no matter what side of a wall they live on, and no matter what they look like.
We are here today because of the Prague Spring -- because the simple and principled pursuit of liberty and
opportunity shamed those who relied on the power of tanks and arms to put down the will of a people.
We are here today because 20 years ago, the people of this city took to the streets to claim the promise of a
new day, and the fundamental human rights that had been denied them for far too long. Sametová Revoluce
-- the Velvet Revolution taught us many things. It showed us that peaceful protest could shake the
foundations of an empire, and expose the emptiness of an ideology. It showed us that small countries can
play a pivotal role in world events, and that young people can lead the way in overcoming old conflicts. And
it proved that moral leadership is more powerful than any weapon.
That's why I'm speaking to you in the center of a Europe that is peaceful, united and free -- because
ordinary people believed that divisions could be bridged, even when their leaders did not. They believed that
walls could come down; that peace could prevail.
We are here today because Americans and Czechs believed against all odds that today could be possible.
Now, we share this common history. But now this generation -- our generation -- cannot stand still. We, too,
have a choice to make. As the world has become less divided, it has become more interconnected. And
we've seen events move faster than our ability to control them -- a global economy in crisis, a changing
climate, the persistent dangers of old conflicts, new threats and the spread of catastrophic weapons.
None of these challenges can be solved quickly or easily. But all of them demand that we listen to one
another and work together; that we focus on our common interests, not on occasional differences; and that
we reaffirm our shared values, which are stronger than any force that could drive us apart. That is the work
that we must carry on. That is the work that I have come to Europe to begin.
To renew our prosperity, we need action coordinated across borders. That means investments to create
new jobs. That means resisting the walls of protectionism that stand in the way of growth. That means a
change in our financial system, with new rules to prevent abuse and future crisis.
And we have an obligation to our common prosperity and our common humanity to extend a hand to those
emerging markets and impoverished people who are suffering the most, even though they may have had
very little to do with financial crises, which is why we set aside over a trillion dollars for the International
Monetary Fund earlier this week, to make sure that everybody -- everybody -- receives some assistance.
Now, to protect our planet, now is the time to change the way that we use energy. Together, we must
confront climate change by ending the world's dependence on fossil fuels, by tapping the power of new
sources of energy like the wind and sun, and calling upon all nations to do their part. And I pledge to you
that in this global effort, the United States is now ready to lead.
To provide for our common security, we must strengthen our alliance. NATO was founded 60 years ago,
after Communism took over Czechoslovakia. That was when the free world learned too late that it could not
afford division. So we came together to forge the strongest alliance that the world has ever known. And we
should -- stood shoulder to shoulder -- year after year, decade after decade -- until an Iron Curtain was
lifted, and freedom spread like flowing water.
This marks the 10th year of NATO membership for the Czech Republic. And I know that many times in the
20th century, decisions were made without you at the table. Great powers let you down, or determined your
destiny without your voice being heard. I am here to say that the United States will never turn its back on the
people of this nation. We are bound by shared values, shared history -- We are bound by shared values and
shared history and the enduring promise of our alliance. NATO's Article V states it clearly: An attack on one
is an attack on all. That is a promise for our time, and for all time.
The people of the Czech Republic kept that promise after America was attacked; thousands were killed on
our soil, and NATO responded. NATO's mission in Afghanistan is fundamental to the safety of people on
both sides of the Atlantic. We are targeting the same al Qaeda terrorists who have struck from New York to
London, and helping the Afghan people take responsibility for their future. We are demonstrating that free
nations can make common cause on behalf of our common security. And I want you to know that we honor
the sacrifices of the Czech people in this endeavor, and mourn the loss of those you've lost.
But no alliance can afford to stand still. We must work together as NATO members so that we have
contingency plans in place to deal with new threats, wherever they may come from. We must strengthen our
cooperation with one another, and with other nations and institutions around the world, to confront dangers
that recognize no borders. And we must pursue constructive relations with Russia on issues of common
concern.
Now, one of those issues that I'll focus on today is fundamental to the security of our nations and to the
peace of the world -- that's the future of nuclear weapons in the 21st century.
The existence of thousands of nuclear weapons is the most dangerous legacy of the Cold War. No nuclear
war was fought between the United States and the Soviet Union, but generations lived with the knowledge
that their world could be erased in a single flash of light. Cities like Prague that existed for centuries, that
embodied the beauty and the talent of so much of humanity, would have ceased to exist.
Today, the Cold War has disappeared but thousands of those weapons have not. In a strange turn of
history, the threat of global nuclear war has gone down, but the risk of a nuclear attack has gone up. More
nations have acquired these weapons. Testing has continued. Black market trade in nuclear secrets and
nuclear materials abound. The technology to build a bomb has spread. Terrorists are determined to buy,
build or steal one. Our efforts to contain these dangers are centered on a global non-proliferation regime,
but as more people and nations break the rules, we could reach the point where the center cannot hold.
Now, understand, this matters to people everywhere. One nuclear weapon exploded in one city -- be it New
York or Moscow, Islamabad or Mumbai, Tokyo or Tel Aviv, Paris or Prague -- could kill hundreds of
thousands of people. And no matter where it happens, there is no end to what the consequences might be --
for our global safety, our security, our society, our economy, to our ultimate survival.
Some argue that the spread of these weapons cannot be stopped, cannot be checked -- that we are
destined to live in a world where more nations and more people possess the ultimate tools of destruction.
Such fatalism is a deadly adversary, for if we believe that the spread of nuclear weapons is inevitable, then
in some way we are admitting to ourselves that the use of nuclear weapons is inevitable.
Just as we stood for freedom in the 20th century, we must stand together for the right of people everywhere
to live free from fear in the 21st century. And as nuclear power -- as a nuclear power, as the only nuclear
power to have used a nuclear weapon, the United States has a moral responsibility to act. We cannot
succeed in this endeavor alone, but we can lead it, we can start it.
So today, I state clearly and with conviction America's commitment to seek the peace and security of a
world without nuclear weapons. I'm not naive. This goal will not be reached quickly -- perhaps not in my
lifetime. It will take patience and persistence. But now we, too, must ignore the voices who tell us that the
world cannot change. We have to insist, "Yes, we can."
Now, let me describe to you the trajectory we need to be on. First, the United States will take concrete steps
towards a world without nuclear weapons. To put an end to Cold War thinking, we will reduce the role of
nuclear weapons in our national security strategy, and urge others to do the same. Make no mistake: As
long as these weapons exist, the United States will maintain a safe, secure and effective arsenal to deter
any adversary, and guarantee that defense to our allies -- including the Czech Republic. But we will begin
the work of reducing our arsenal.
To reduce our warheads and stockpiles, we will negotiate a new Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty with the
Russians this year. President Medvedev and I began this process in London, and will seek a new
agreement by the end of this year that is legally binding and sufficiently bold. And this will set the stage for
further cuts, and we will seek to include all nuclear weapons states in this endeavor.
To achieve a global ban on nuclear testing, my administration will immediately and aggressively pursue U.S.
ratification of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. After more than five decades of talks, it is time for the
testing of nuclear weapons to finally be banned.
And to cut off the building blocks needed for a bomb, the United States will seek a new treaty that verifiably
ends the production of fissile materials intended for use in state nuclear weapons. If we are serious about
stopping the spread of these weapons, then we should put an end to the dedicated production of weaponsgrade
materials that create them. That's the first step.
Second, together we will strengthen the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty as a basis for cooperation.
The basic bargain is sound: Countries with nuclear weapons will move towards disarmament, countries
without nuclear weapons will not acquire them, and all countries can access peaceful nuclear energy. To
strengthen the treaty, we should embrace several principles. We need more resources and authority to
strengthen international inspections. We need real and immediate consequences for countries caught
breaking the rules or trying to leave the treaty without cause.
And we should build a new framework for civil nuclear cooperation, including an international fuel bank, so
that countries can access peaceful power without increasing the risks of proliferation. That must be the right
of every nation that renounces nuclear weapons, especially developing countries embarking on peaceful
programs. And no approach will succeed if it's based on the denial of rights to nations that play by the rules.
We must harness the power of nuclear energy on behalf of our efforts to combat climate change, and to
advance peace opportunity for all people.
But we go forward with no illusions. Some countries will break the rules. That's why we need a structure in
place that ensures when any nation does, they will face consequences.
Just this morning, we were reminded again of why we need a new and more rigorous approach to address
this threat. North Korea broke the rules once again by testing a rocket that could be used for long range
missiles. This provocation underscores the need for action -- not just this afternoon at the U.N. Security
Council, but in our determination to prevent the spread of these weapons.
Rules must be binding. Violations must be punished. Words must mean something. The world must stand
together to prevent the spread of these weapons. Now is the time for a strong international response -- now
is the time for a strong international response, and North Korea must know that the path to security and
respect will never come through threats and illegal weapons. All nations must come together to build a
stronger, global regime. And that's why we must stand shoulder to shoulder to pressure the North Koreans
to change course.
Iran has yet to build a nuclear weapon. My administration will seek engagement with Iran based on mutual
interests and mutual respect. We believe in dialogue. But in that dialogue we will present a clear choice. We
want Iran to take its rightful place in the community of nations, politically and economically. We will support
Iran's right to peaceful nuclear energy with rigorous inspections. That's a path that the Islamic Republic can
take. Or the government can choose increased isolation, international pressure, and a potential nuclear
arms race in the region that will increase insecurity for all.
So let me be clear: Iran's nuclear and ballistic missile activity poses a real threat, not just to the United
States, but to Iran's neighbors and our allies. The Czech Republic and Poland have been courageous in
agreeing to host a defense against these missiles. As long as the threat from Iran persists, we will go
forward with a missile defense system that is cost-effective and proven. If the Iranian threat is eliminated, we
will have a stronger basis for security, and the driving force for missile defense construction in Europe will
be removed.
So, finally, we must ensure that terrorists never acquire a nuclear weapon. This is the most immediate and
extreme threat to global security. One terrorist with one nuclear weapon could unleash massive destruction.
Al Qaeda has said it seeks a bomb and that it would have no problem with using it. And we know that there
is unsecured nuclear material across the globe. To protect our people, we must act with a sense of purpose
without delay.
So today I am announcing a new international effort to secure all vulnerable nuclear material around the
world within four years. We will set new standards, expand our cooperation with Russia, pursue new
partnerships to lock down these sensitive materials.
We must also build on our efforts to break up black markets, detect and intercept materials in transit, and
use financial tools to disrupt this dangerous trade. Because this threat will be lasting, we should come
together to turn efforts such as the Proliferation Security Initiative and the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism into durable international institutions. And we should start by having a Global Summit on
Nuclear Security that the United States will host within the next year.
Now, I know that there are some who will question whether we can act on such a broad agenda. There are
those who doubt whether true international cooperation is possible, given inevitable differences among
nations. And there are those who hear talk of a world without nuclear weapons and doubt whether it's worth
setting a goal that seems impossible to achieve.
But make no mistake: We know where that road leads. When nations and peoples allow themselves to be
defined by their differences, the gulf between them widens. When we fail to pursue peace, then it stays
forever beyond our grasp. We know the path when we choose fear over hope. To denounce or shrug off a
call for cooperation is an easy but also a cowardly thing to do. That's how wars begin. That's where human
progress ends.
There is violence and injustice in our world that must be confronted. We must confront it not by splitting
apart but by standing together as free nations, as free people. I know that a call to arms can stir the souls of
men and women more than a call to lay them down. But that is why the voices for peace and progress must
be raised together.
Those are the voices that still echo through the streets of Prague. Those are the ghosts of 1968. Those
were the joyful sounds of the Velvet Revolution. Those were the Czechs who helped bring down a nucleararmed
empire without firing a shot.
Human destiny will be what we make of it. And here in Prague, let us honor our past by reaching for a better
future. Let us bridge our divisions, build upon our hopes, accept our responsibility to leave this world more
prosperous and more peaceful than we found it. Together we can do it.
Thank you very much. Thank you, Prague.
Mr. Speaker, Madam Deputy Speaker, distinguished members, I am honored to speak in this chamber, and
I am committed to renewing the alliance between our nations and the friendship between our people.
This is my first trip overseas as President of the United States. I've been to the G20 summit in London, and
the NATO summit in Strasbourg, and the European Union summit in Prague. Some people have asked me
if I chose to continue my travels to Ankara and Istanbul to send a message to the world. And my answer is
simple: Evet -- yes. Turkey is a critical ally. Turkey is an important part of Europe. And Turkey and the
United States must stand together -- and work together -- to overcome the challenges of our time.
This morning I had the great privilege of visiting the tomb of your extraordinary founder of your republic. And
I was deeply impressed by this beautiful memorial to a man who did so much to shape the course of history.
But it is also clear that the greatest monument to Ataturk's life is not something that can be cast in stone and
marble. His greatest legacy is Turkey's strong, vibrant, secular democracy, and that is the work that this
assembly carries on today.
This future was not easily assured, it was not guaranteed. At the end of World War I, Turkey could have
succumbed to the foreign powers that were trying to claim its territory, or sought to restore an ancient
empire. But Turkey chose a different future. You freed yourself from foreign control, and you founded a
republic that commands the respect of the United States and the wider world.
And there is a simple truth to this story: Turkey's democracy is your own achievement. It was not forced
upon you by any outside power, nor did it come without struggle and sacrifice. Turkey draws strength from
both the successes of the past, and from the efforts of each generation of Turks that makes new progress
for your people.
Now, my country's democracy has its own story. The general who led America in revolution and governed
as our first President was, as many of you know, George Washington. And like you, we built a grand
monument to honor our founding father -- a towering obelisk that stands in the heart of the capital city that
bears Washington's name. I can see the Washington Monument from the window of the White House every
day.
It took decades to build. There were frequent delays. Over time, more and more people contributed to help
make this monument the inspiring structure that still stands tall today. Among those who came to our aid
were friends from all across the world who offered their own tributes to Washington and the country he
helped to found.
And one of those tributes came from Istanbul. Ottoman Sultan Abdulmecid sent a marble plaque that helped
to build the Washington Monument. Inscribed in the plaque was a poem that began with a few simple words:
"So as to strengthen the friendship between the two countries." Over 150 years have passed since those
words were carved into marble. Our nations have changed in many ways. But our friendship is strong, and
our alliance endures.
It is a friendship that flourished in the years after World War II, when President Truman committed our
nation to the defense of Turkey's freedom and sovereignty, and Turkey committed itself into the NATO
Alliance. Turkish troops have served by our side from Korea to Kosovo to Kabul. Together, we withstood the
great test of the Cold War. Trade between our nations has steadily advanced. So has cooperation in
science and research.
The ties among our people have deepened, as well, and more and more Americans of Turkish origin live
and work and succeed within our borders. And as a basketball fan, I've even noticed that Hedo Turkoglu
and Mehmet Okur have got some pretty good basketball games.
The United States and Turkey have not always agreed on every issue, and that's to be expected -- no two
nations do. But we have stood together through many challenges over the last 60 years. And because of the
strength of our alliance and the endurance of our friendship, both America and Turkey are stronger and the
world is more secure.
Now, our two democracies are confronted by an unprecedented set of challenges: An economic crisis that
recognizes no borders; extremism that leads to the killing of innocent men and women and children; strains
on our energy supply and a changing climate; the proliferation of the world's deadliest weapons; and the
persistence of tragic conflict.
These are the great tests of our young century. And the choices that we make in the coming years will
determine whether the future will be shaped by fear or by freedom; by poverty or by prosperity; by strife or
by a just, secure and lasting peace.
This much is certain: No one nation can confront these challenges alone, and all nations have a stake in
overcoming them. That is why we must listen to one another, and seek common ground. That is why we
must build on our mutual interests, and rise above our differences. We are stronger when we act together. 
That is the message that I've carried with me throughout this trip to Europe. That is the message that I
delivered when I had the privilege of meeting with your President and with your Prime Minister. That will be
the approach of the United States of America going forward.
Already, America and Turkey are working with the G20 on an unprecedented response to an unprecedented
economic crisis. Now, this past week, we came together to ensure that the world's largest economies take
strong and coordinated action to stimulate growth and restore the flow of credit; to reject the pressures of
protectionism, and to extend a hand to developing countries and the people hit hardest by this downturn;
and to dramatically reform our regulatory system so that the world never faces a crisis like this again.
As we go forward, the United States and Turkey can pursue many opportunities to serve prosperity for our
people. The President and I this morning talked about expanding the ties of commerce and trade. There's
enormous opportunity when it comes to energy to create jobs. And we can increase new sources to not only
free ourselves from dependence of other energies -- other countries' energy sources, but also to combat
climate change. We should build on our Clean Technology Fund to leverage efficiency and renewable
energy investments in Turkey. And to power markets in Turkey and Europe, the United States will continue
to support your central role as an East-West corridor for oil and natural gas.
This economic cooperation only reinforces the common security that Europe and the United States share
with Turkey as a NATO ally, and the common values that we share as democracies. So in meeting the
challenges of the 21st century, we must seek the strength of a Europe that is truly united, peaceful and free.
So let me be clear: The United States strongly supports Turkey's bid to become a member of the European
Union. We speak not as members of the EU, but as close friends of both Turkey and Europe. Turkey has
been a resolute ally and a responsible partner in transatlantic and European institutions. Turkey is bound to
Europe by more than the bridges over the Bosphorous. Centuries of shared history, culture, and commerce
bring you together. Europe gains by the diversity of ethnicity, tradition and faith -- it is not diminished by it.
And Turkish membership would broaden and strengthen Europe's foundation once more.
Now, of course, Turkey has its own responsibilities. And you've made important progress towards
membership. But I also know that Turkey has pursued difficult political reforms not simply because it's good
for EU membership, but because it's right for Turkey.
In the last several years, you've abolished state security courts, you've expanded the right to counsel.
You've reformed the penal code and strengthened laws that govern the freedom of the press and assembly.
You've lifted bans on teaching and broadcasting Kurdish, and the world noted with respect the important
signal sent through a new state Kurdish television station.
These achievements have created new laws that must be implemented, and a momentum that should be
sustained. For democracies cannot be static -- they must move forward. Freedom of religion and expression
lead to a strong and vibrant civil society that only strengthens the state, which is why steps like reopening
Halki Seminary will send such an important signal inside Turkey and beyond. An enduring commitment to
the rule of law is the only way to achieve the security that comes from justice for all people. Robust minority
rights let societies benefit from the full measure of contributions from all citizens.
I say this as the President of a country that not very long ago made it hard for somebody who looks like me
to vote, much less be President of the United States. But it is precisely that capacity to change that enriches
our countries. Every challenge that we face is more easily met if we tend to our own democratic foundation.
This work is never over. That's why, in the United States, we recently ordered the prison at Guantanamo
Bay closed. That's why we prohibited -- without exception or equivocation -- the use of torture. All of us have
to change. And sometimes change is hard.
Another issue that confronts all democracies as they move to the future is how we deal with the past. The
United States is still working through some of our own darker periods in our history. Facing the Washington
Monument that I spoke of is a memorial of Abraham Lincoln, the man who freed those who were enslaved
even after Washington led our Revolution. Our country still struggles with the legacies of slavery and
segregation, the past treatment of Native Americans.
Human endeavor is by its nature imperfect. History is often tragic, but unresolved, it can be a heavy weight.
Each country must work through its past. And reckoning with the past can help us seize a better future. I
know there's strong views in this chamber about the terrible events of 1915. And while there's been a good
deal of commentary about my views, it's really about how the Turkish and Armenian people deal with the
past. And the best way forward for the Turkish and Armenian people is a process that works through the
past in a way that is honest, open and constructive.
We've already seen historic and courageous steps taken by Turkish and Armenian leaders. These contacts
hold out the promise of a new day. An open border would return the Turkish and Armenian people to a
peaceful and prosperous coexistence that would serve both of your nations. So I want you to know that the
United States strongly supports the full normalization of relations between Turkey and Armenia. It is a cause
worth working towards.
It speaks to Turkey's leadership that you are poised to be the only country in the region to have normal and
peaceful relations with all the South Caucasus nations. And to advance that peace, you can play a
constructive role in helping to resolve the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, which has continued for far too long.
Advancing peace also includes the disputes that persist in the Eastern Mediterranean. And here there's a
cause for hope. The two Cypriot leaders have an opportunity through their commitment to negotiations
under the United Nations Good Offices Mission. The United States is willing to offer all the help sought by
the parties as they work towards a just and lasting settlement that reunifies Cyprus into a bizonal and
bicommunal federation.
These efforts speak to one part of the critical region that surrounds Turkey. And when we consider the
challenges before us, on issue after issue, we share common goals. In the Middle East, we share the goal
of a lasting peace between Israel and its neighbors. Let me be clear: The United States strongly supports
the goal of two states, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security. That is a goal shared
by Palestinians, Israelis, and people of goodwill around the world. That is a goal that the parties agreed to in
the road map and at Annapolis. That is a goal that I will actively pursue as President of the United States.
We know the road ahead will be difficult. Both Israelis and Palestinians must take steps that are necessary
to build confidence and trust.
Both Israelis and Palestinians, both must live up to the commitments they have made. Both must overcome
longstanding passions and the politics of the moment to make progress towards a secure and lasting peace.
The United States and Turkey can help the Palestinians and Israelis make this journey. Like the United
States, Turkey has been a friend and partner in Israel's quest for security. And like the United States, you
seek a future of opportunity and statehood for the Palestinians. So now, working together, we must not give
into pessimism and mistrust. We must pursue every opportunity for progress, as you've done by supporting
negotiations between Syria and Israel. We must extend a hand to those Palestinians who are in need, while
helping them strengthen their own institutions. We must reject the use of terror, and recognize that Israel's
security concerns are legitimate.
The peace of the region will also be advanced if Iran forgoes any nuclear weapons ambitions. Now, as I
made clear in Prague yesterday, no one is served by the spread of nuclear weapons, least of all Turkey.
You live in a difficult region and a nuclear arm race would not serve the security of this nation well. This part
of the world has known enough violence. It has known enough hatred. It does not need a race for an evermore
powerful tool of destruction.
Now, I have made it clear to the people and leaders of the Islamic Republic of Iran that the United States
seeks engagement based on mutual interest and mutual respect. We want Iran to play its rightful role in the
community of nations. Iran is a great civilization. We want them to engage in the economic and political
integration that brings prosperity and security. But Iran's leaders must choose whether they will try to build a
weapon or build a better future for their people.
So both Turkey and the United States support a secure and united Iraq that does not serve as a safe haven
for terrorists. I know there were differences about whether to go to war. There were differences within my
own country, as well. But now we must come together as we end this war responsibly, because the future of
Iraq is inseparable from the future of the broader region. As I've already announced, and many of you are
aware, the United States will remove our combat brigades by the end of next August, while working with the
Iraqi government as they take responsibility for security. And we will work with Iraq, Turkey, and all Iraq's
neighbors, to forge a new dialogue that reconciles differences and advances our common security.
Make no mistake, though: Iraq, Turkey, and the United States face a common threat from terrorism. That
includes the al Qaeda terrorists who have sought to drive Iraqis apart and destroy their country. That
includes the PKK. There is no excuse for terror against any nation. As President, and as a NATO ally, I
pledge that you will have our support against the terrorist activities of the PKK or anyone else. These efforts
will be strengthened by the continued work to build ties of cooperation between Turkey, the Iraqi
government, and Iraq's Kurdish leaders, and by your continued efforts to promote education and opportunity
and democracy for the Kurdish population here inside Turkey.
Finally, we share the common goal of denying al Qaeda a safe haven in Pakistan or Afghanistan. The world
has come too far to let this region backslide, and to let al Qaeda terrorists plot further attacks. That's why we
are committed to a more focused effort to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat al Qaeda. That is why we are
increasing our efforts to train Afghans to sustain their own security, and to reconcile former adversaries.
That's why we are increasing our support for the people of Afghanistan and Pakistan, so that we stand on
the side not only of security, but also of opportunity and the promise of a better life.
Turkey has been a true partner. Your troops were among the first in the International Security Assistance
Force. You have sacrificed much in this endeavor. Now we must achieve our goals together. I appreciate
that you've offered to help us train and support Afghan security forces, and expand opportunity across the
region. Together, we can rise to meet this challenge like we have so many before.
I know there have been difficulties these last few years. I know that the trust that binds the United States
and Turkey has been strained, and I know that strain is shared in many places where the Muslim faith is
practiced. So let me say this as clearly as I can: The United States is not, and will never be, at war with
Islam. In fact, our partnership with the Muslim world is critical not just in rolling back the violent ideologies
that people of all faiths reject, but also to strengthen opportunity for all its people.
I also want to be clear that America's relationship with the Muslim community, the Muslim world, cannot, and
will not, just be based upon opposition to terrorism. We seek broader engagement based on mutual interest
and mutual respect. We will listen carefully, we will bridge misunderstandings, and we will seek common
ground. We will be respectful, even when we do not agree. We will convey our deep appreciation for the
Islamic faith, which has done so much over the centuries to shape the world -- including in my own country.
The United States has been enriched by Muslim Americans. Many other Americans have Muslims in their
families or have lived in a Muslim-majority country. I know, because I am one of them.
Above all, above all we will demonstrate through actions our commitment to a better future. I want to help
more children get the education that they need to succeed. We want to promote health care in places where
people are vulnerable. We want to expand the trade and investment that can bring prosperity for all people.
In the months ahead, I will present specific programs to advance these goals. Our focus will be on what we
can do, in partnership with people across the Muslim world, to advance our common hopes and our
common dreams. And when people look back on this time, let it be said of America that we extended the
hand of friendship to all people.
There's an old Turkish proverb: "You cannot put out fire with flames." America knows this. Turkey knows
this. There's some who must be met by force, they will not compromise. But force alone cannot solve our
problems, and it is no alternative to extremism. The future must belong to those who create, not those who
destroy. That is the future we must work for, and we must work for it together.
I know there are those who like to debate Turkey's future. They see your country at the crossroads of
continents, and touched by the currents of history. They know that this has been a place where civilizations
meet, and different peoples come together. They wonder whether you will be pulled in one direction or
another.
But I believe here is what they don't understand: Turkey's greatness lies in your ability to be at the center of
things. This is not where East and West divide -- this is where they come together. In the beauty of your
culture. In the richness of your history. In the strength of your democracy. In your hopes for tomorrow. I am
honored to stand here with you -- to look forward to the future that we must reach for together -- and to
reaffirm America's commitment to our strong and enduring friendship.
Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you.