Good morning. It is a great honor for me to join you at the New Economic School. Michelle and I are so
pleased to be in Moscow. And as somebody who was born in Hawaii, I'm glad to be here in July instead of
January.
I know that NES is a young school, but I speak to you today with deep respect for Russia's timeless
heritage. Russian writers have helped us understand the complexity of the human experience, and
recognize eternal truths. Russian painters, composers, and dancers have introduced us to new forms of
beauty. Russian scientists have cured disease, sought new frontiers of progress, and helped us go to
space.
These are contributions that are not contained by Russia's borders, as vast as those borders are. Indeed,
Russia's heritage has touched every corner of the world, and speaks to the humanity that we share. That
includes my own country, which has been blessed with Russian immigrants for decades; we've been
enriched by Russian culture, and enhanced by Russian cooperation. And as a resident of Washington, D.C.,
I continue to benefit from the contributions of Russians -- specifically, from Alexander Ovechkin. We're very
pleased to have him in Washington, D.C.
Here at NES, you have inherited this great cultural legacy, but your focus on economics is no less
fundamental to the future of humanity. As Pushkin said, "Inspiration is needed in geometry just as much as
poetry." And today, I want particularly to speak to those of you preparing to graduate. You're poised to be
leaders in academia and industry; in finance and government. But before you move forward, it's worth
reflecting on what has already taken place during your young lives.
Like President Medvedev and myself, you're not old enough to have witnessed the darkest hours of the
Cold War, when hydrogen bombs were tested in the atmosphere, and children drilled in fallout shelters, and
we reached the brink of nuclear catastrophe. But you are the last generation born when the world was
divided. At that time, the American and Soviet armies were still massed in Europe, trained and ready to
fight. The ideological trenches of the last century were roughly in place. Competition in everything from
astrophysics to athletics was treated as a zero-sum game. If one person won, then the other person had to
lose.
And then, within a few short years, the world as it was ceased to be. Now, make no mistake: This change
did not come from any one nation. The Cold War reached a conclusion because of the actions of many
nations over many years, and because the people of Russia and Eastern Europe stood up and decided that
its end would be peaceful.
With the end of the Cold War, there were extraordinary expectations -- for peace and for prosperity; for new
arrangements among nations, and new opportunities for individuals. Like all periods of great change, it was
a time of ambitious plans and endless possibilities. But, of course, things don't always work out exactly as
planned. Back in 1993, shortly after this school opened, one NES student summed up the difficulty of
change when he told a reporter, and I quote him: "The real world is not so rational as on paper." The real
world is not so rational as on paper.
Over two tumultuous decades, that truth has been borne out around the world. Great wealth has been
created, but it has not eliminated vast pockets of crushing poverty. Poverty exists here, it exists in the United
States, and it exists all around the world. More people have gone to the ballot box, but too many
governments still fail to protect the rights of their people. Ideological struggles have diminished, but they've
been replaced by conflicts over tribe and ethnicity and religion. A human being with a computer can hold the
same amount of information stored in the Russian State Library, but that technology can also be used to do
great harm.
In a new Russia, the disappearance of old political and economic restrictions after the end of the Soviet
Union brought both opportunity and hardship. A few prospered, but many more did not. There were tough
times. But the Russian people showed strength and made sacrifices, and you achieved hard-earned
progress through a growing economy and greater confidence. And despite painful times, many in Eastern
Europe and Russia are much better off today than 20 years ago.
We see that progress here at NES -- a school founded with Western support that is now distinctly Russian;
a place of learning and inquiry where the test of an idea is not whether it is Russian or American or
European, but whether it works. Above all, we see that progress in all of you -- young people with a young
century to shape as you see fit.
Your lifetime coincides with this era of transition. But think about the fundamental questions asked when this
school was founded. What kind of future is Russia going to have? What kind of future are Russia and
America going to have together? What world order will replace the Cold War? Those questions still don't
have clear answers, and so now they must be answered by you -- by your generation in Russia, in America,
and around the world. You get to decide. And while I cannot answer those questions for you, I can speak
plainly about the future that America is seeking.
To begin with, let me be clear: America wants a strong, peaceful, and prosperous Russia. This belief is
rooted in our respect for the Russian people, and a shared history between our nations that goes beyond
competition. Despite our past rivalry, our people were allies in the greatest struggle of the last century.
Recently, I noted this when I was in Normandy -- for just as men from Boston and Birmingham risked all that
they had to storm those beaches and scale those cliffs, Soviet soldiers from places like Kazan and Kiev
endured unimaginable hardships to repeal -- to repel an invasion, and turn the tide in the east. As President
John Kennedy said, "No nation in history of battle ever suffered more than the Soviet Union in the Second
World War."
So as we honor this past, we also recognize the future benefit that will come from a strong and vibrant
Russia. Think of the issues that will define your lives: security from nuclear weapons and extremism; access
to markets and opportunity; health and the environment; an international system that protects sovereignty
and human rights, while promoting stability and prosperity. These challenges demand global partnership,
and that partnership will be stronger if Russia occupies its rightful place as a great power.
Yet unfortunately, there is sometimes a sense that old assumptions must prevail, old ways of thinking; a
conception of power that is rooted in the past rather than in the future. There is the 20th century view that
the United States and Russia are destined to be antagonists, and that a strong Russia or a strong America
can only assert themselves in opposition to one another. And there is a 19th century view that we are
destined to vie for spheres of influence, and that great powers must forge competing blocs to balance one
another.
These assumptions are wrong. In 2009, a great power does not show strength by dominating or demonizing
other countries. The days when empires could treat sovereign states as pieces on a chess board are over.
As I said in Cairo, given our independence, any world order that -- given our interdependence, any world
order that tries to elevate one nation or one group of people over another will inevitably fail. The pursuit of
power is no longer a zero-sum game -- progress must be shared.
That's why I have called for a "reset" in relations between the United States and Russia. This must be more
than a fresh start between the Kremlin and the White House -- though that is important and I've had
excellent discussions with both your President and your Prime Minister. It must be a sustained effort among
the American and Russian people to identify mutual interests, and expand dialogue and cooperation that
can pave the way to progress.
This will not be easy. It's difficult to forge a lasting partnership between former adversaries, it's hard to
change habits that have been ingrained in our governments and our bureaucracies for decades. But I
believe that on the fundamental issues that will shape this century, Americans and Russians share common
interests that form a basis for cooperation. It is not for me to define Russia's national interests, but I can tell
you about America's national interests, and I believe that you will see that we share common ground.
First, America has an interest in reversing the spread of nuclear weapons and preventing their use.
In the last century, generations of Americans and Russians inherited the power to destroy nations, and the
understanding that using that power would bring about our own destruction. In 2009, our inheritance is
different. You and I don't have to ask whether American and Russian leaders will respect a balance of terror
-- we understand the horrific consequences of any war between our two countries. But we do have to ask
this question: We have to ask whether extremists who have killed innocent civilians in New York and in
Moscow will show that same restraint. We have to ask whether 10 or 20 or 50 nuclear-armed nations will
protect their arsenals and refrain from using them.
This is the core of the nuclear challenge in the 21st century. The notion that prestige comes from holding
these weapons, or that we can protect ourselves by picking and choosing which nations can have these
weapons, is an illusion. In the short period since the end of the Cold War, we've already seen India,
Pakistan, and North Korea conduct nuclear tests. Without a fundamental change, do any of us truly believe
that the next two decades will not bring about the further spread of these nuclear weapons?
That's why America is committed to stopping nuclear proliferation, and ultimately seeking a world without
nuclear weapons. That is consistent with our commitment under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. That
is our responsibility as the world's two leading nuclear powers. And while I know this goal won't be met
soon, pursuing it provides the legal and moral foundation to prevent the proliferation and eventual use of
nuclear weapons.
We're already taking important steps to build this foundation. Yesterday, President Medvedev and I made
progress on negotiating a new treaty that will substantially reduce our warheads and delivery systems. We
renewed our commitment to clean, safe and peaceful nuclear energy, which must be a right for all nations
that live up to their responsibilities under the NPT. And we agreed to increase cooperation on nuclear
security, which is essential to achieving the goal of securing all vulnerable nuclear material within four years.
As we keep our own commitments, we must hold other nations accountable for theirs. Whether America or
Russia, neither of us would benefit from a nuclear arms race in East Asia or the Middle East. That's why we
should be united in opposing North Korea's efforts to become a nuclear power, and opposing Iran's efforts
to acquire a nuclear weapon. And I'm pleased that President Medvedev and I agreed upon a joint threat
assessment of the ballistic challenges -- ballistic missile challenges of the 21st century, including from Iran
and North Korea.
This is not about singling out individual nations -- it's about the responsibilities of all nations. If we fail to
stand together, then the NPT and the Security Council will lose credibility, and international law will give way
to the law of the jungle. And that benefits no one. As I said in Prague, rules must be binding, violations must
be punished, and words must mean something.
The successful enforcement of these rules will remove causes of disagreement. I know Russia opposes the
planned configuration for missile defense in Europe. And my administration is reviewing these plans to
enhance the security of America, Europe and the world. And I've made it clear that this system is directed at
preventing a potential attack from Iran. It has nothing to do with Russia. In fact, I want to work together with
Russia on a missile defense architecture that makes us all safer. But if the threat from Iran's nuclear and
ballistic missile program is eliminated, the driving force for missile defense in Europe will be eliminated, and
that is in our mutual interests.
Now, in addition to securing the world's most dangerous weapons, a second area where America has a
critical national interest is in isolating and defeating violent extremists.
For years, al Qaeda and its affiliates have defiled a great religion of peace and justice, and ruthlessly
murdered men, women and children of all nationalities and faiths. Indeed, above all, they have murdered
Muslims. And these extremists have killed in Amman and Bali; Islamabad and Kabul; and they have the
blood of Americans and Russians on their hands. They're plotting to kill more of our people, and they benefit
from safe havens that allow them to train and operate -- particularly along the border of Pakistan and
Afghanistan.
And that's why America has a clear goal: to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat al Qaeda and its allies in
Afghanistan and Pakistan. We seek no bases, nor do we want to control these nations. Instead, we want to
work with international partners, including Russia, to help Afghans and Pakistanis advance their own
security and prosperity. And that's why I'm pleased that Russia has agreed to allow the United States to
supply our coalition forces through your territory. Neither America nor Russia has an interest in an
Afghanistan or Pakistan governed by the Taliban. It's time to work together on behalf of a different future -- a
future in which we leave behind the great game of the past and the conflict of the present; a future in which
all of us contribute to the security of Central Asia.
Now, beyond Afghanistan, America is committed to promoting the opportunity that will isolate extremists.
We are helping the Iraqi people build a better future, and leaving Iraq to the Iraqis. We're pursuing the goal
of two states, Israel and Palestine, living in peace and security. We're partnering with Muslim communities
around the world to advance education, health, and economic development. In each of these endeavors, I
believe that the Russian people share our goals, and will benefit from success -- and we need to partner
together.
Now, in addition to these security concerns, the third area that I will discuss is America's interest in global
prosperity. And since we have so many economists and future businessmen and women in the room, I know
this is of great interest to you.
We meet in the midst of the worst global recession in a generation. I believe that the free market is the
greatest force for creating and distributing wealth that the world has known. But wherever the market is
allowed to run rampant -- through excessive risk-taking, a lack of regulation, or corruption -- then all are
endangered, whether we live on the Mississippi or on the Volga.
In America, we're now taking unprecedented steps to jumpstart our economy and reform our system of
regulation. But just as no nation can wall itself off from the consequences of a global crisis, no one can
serve as the sole engine of global growth. You see, during your lives, something fundamental has changed.
And while this crisis has shown us the risks that come with change, that risk is overwhelmed by opportunity.
Think of what's possible today that was unthinkable two decades ago. A young woman with an Internet
connection in Bangalore, India can compete with anybody anywhere in the world. An entrepreneur with a
start-up company in Beijing can take his business global. An NES professor in Moscow can collaborate with
colleagues at Harvard or Stanford. That's good for all of us, because when prosperity is created in India,
that's a new market for our goods; when new ideas take hold in China, that pushes our businesses to
innovate; when new connections are forged among people, all of us are enriched.
There is extraordinary potential for increased cooperation between Americans and Russians. We can
pursue trade that is free and fair and integrated with the wider world. We can boost investment that creates
jobs in both our countries, we can forge partnerships on energy that tap not only traditional resources, like
oil and gas, but new sources of energy that will drive growth and combat climate change. All of that,
Americans and Russians can do together.
Now, government can promote this cooperation, but ultimately individuals must advance this cooperation,
because the greatest resource of any nation in the 21st century is you. It's people; it's young people
especially. And the country which taps that resource will be the country that will succeed. That success
depends upon economies that function within the rule of law. As President Medvedev has rightly said, a
mature and effective legal system is a condition for sustained economic development. People everywhere
should have the right to do business or get an education without paying a bribe. Whether they are in
America or Russia or Africa or Latin America, that's not a American idea or a Russian idea -- that's how
people and countries will succeed in the 21st century.
And this brings me to the fourth issue that I will discuss -- America's interest in democratic governments that
protect the rights of their people.
By no means is America perfect. But it is our commitment to certain universal values which allows us to
correct our imperfections, to improve constantly, and to grow stronger over time. Freedom of speech and
assembly has allowed women, and minorities, and workers to protest for full and equal rights at a time when
they were denied. The rule of law and equal administration of justice has busted monopolies, shut down
political machines that were corrupt, ended abuses of power. Independent media have exposed corruption
at all levels of business and government. Competitive elections allow us to change course and hold our
leaders accountable. If our democracy did not advance those rights, then I, as a person of African ancestry,
wouldn't be able to address you as an American citizen, much less a President. Because at the time of our
founding, I had no rights -- people who looked like me. But it is because of that process that I can now stand
before you as President of the United States.
So around the world, America supports these values because they are moral, but also because they work.
The arc of history shows that governments which serve their own people survive and thrive; governments
which serve only their own power do not. Governments that represent the will of their people are far less
likely to descend into failed states, to terrorize their citizens, or to wage war on others. Governments that
promote the rule of law, subject their actions to oversight, and allow for independent institutions are more
dependable trading partners. And in our own history, democracies have been America's most enduring
allies, including those we once waged war with in Europe and Asia -- nations that today live with great
security and prosperity.
Now let me be clear: America cannot and should not seek to impose any system of government on any
other country, nor would we presume to choose which party or individual should run a country. And we
haven't always done what we should have on that front. Even as we meet here today, America supports
now the restoration of the democratically-elected President of Honduras, even though he has strongly
opposed American policies. We do so not because we agree with him. We do so because we respect the
universal principle that people should choose their own leaders, whether they are leaders we agree with or
not.
And that leads me to the final area that I will discuss, which is America's interest in an international system
that advances cooperation while respecting the sovereignty of all nations.
State sovereignty must be a cornerstone of international order. Just as all states should have the right to
choose their leaders, states must have the right to borders that are secure, and to their own foreign policies.
That is true for Russia, just as it is true for the United States. Any system that cedes those rights will lead to
anarchy. That's why we must apply this principle to all nations -- and that includes nations like Georgia and
Ukraine. America will never impose a security arrangement on another country. For any country to become
a member of an organization like NATO, for example, a majority of its people must choose to; they must
undertake reforms; they must be able to contribute to the Alliance's mission. And let me be clear: NATO
should be seeking collaboration with Russia, not confrontation.
And more broadly, we need to foster cooperation and respect among all nations and peoples. As President
of the United States, I will work tirelessly to protect America's security and to advance our interests. But no
one nation can meet the challenges of the 21st century on its own, nor dictate its terms to the world. That is
something that America now understands, just as Russia understands. That's why America seeks an
international system that lets nations pursue their interests peacefully, especially when those interests
diverge; a system where the universal rights of human beings are respected, and violations of those rights
are opposed; a system where we hold ourselves to the same standards that we apply to other nations, with
clear rights and responsibilities for all.
There was a time when Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin could shape the world in one meeting. Those days
are over. The world is more complex today. Billions of people have found their voice, and seek their own
measure of prosperity and self-determination in every corner of the planet. Over the past two decades,
we've witnessed markets grow, wealth spread, and technology used to build -- not destroy. We've seen old
hatreds pass, illusions of differences between people lift and fade away; we've seen the human destiny in
the hands of more and more human beings who can shape their own destinies. Now, we must see that the
period of transition which you have lived through ushers in a new era in which nations live in peace, and
people realize their aspirations for dignity, security, and a better life for their children. That is America's
interest, and I believe that it is Russia's interest as well.
I know that this future can seem distant. Change is hard. In the words of that NES student back in 1993, the
real world is not so rational as on paper. But think of the change that has unfolded with the passing of time.
One hundred years ago, a czar ruled Russia, and Europe was a place of empire. When I was born,
segregation was still the law of the land in parts of America, and my father's Kenya was still a colony. When
you were born, a school like this would have been impossible, and the Internet was only known to a
privileged few.
You get to decide what comes next. You get to choose where change will take us, because the future does
not belong to those who gather armies on a field of battle or bury missiles in the ground; the future belongs
to young people with an education and the imagination to create. That is the source of power in this century.
And given all that has happened in your two decades on Earth, just imagine what you can create in the
years to come.
Every country charts its own course. Russia has cut its way through time like a mighty river through a
canyon, leaving an indelible mark on human history as it goes. As you move this story forward, look to the
future that can be built if we refuse to be burdened by the old obstacles and old suspicions; look to the
future that can be built if we partner on behalf of the aspirations we hold in common. Together, we can build
a world where people are protected, prosperity is enlarged, and our power truly serves progress. And it is all
in your hands. Good luck to all of you.
Thank you very much.
I like this. Thank you. Thank you. I think Congress needs one of those horns. That sounds
pretty good. Sounds like Louis Armstrong back there.
Good afternoon, everybody. It is a great honor for me to be in Accra and to speak to the
representatives of the people of Ghana. I am deeply grateful for the welcome that I've
received, as are Michelle and Malia and Sasha Obama. Ghana's history is rich, the ties
between our two countries are strong, and I am proud that this is my first visit to subSaharan
Africa as President of the United States of America.
I want to thank Madam Speaker and all the members of the House of Representatives for
hosting us today. I want to thank President Mills for his outstanding leadership. To the former
Presidents -- Jerry Rawlings, former President Kufuor -- Vice President, Chief Justice -- thanks
to all of you for your extraordinary hospitality and the wonderful institutions that you've built
here in Ghana.
I'm speaking to you at the end of a long trip. I began in Russia for a summit between two
great powers. I traveled to Italy for a meeting of the world's leading economies. And I've
come here to Ghana for a simple reason: The 21st century will be shaped by what happens
not just in Rome or Moscow or Washington, but by what happens in Accra, as well.
This is the simple truth of a time when the boundaries between people are overwhelmed by
our connections. Your prosperity can expand America's prosperity. Your health and security
can contribute to the world's health and security. And the strength of your democracy can
help advance human rights for people everywhere.
So I do not see the countries and peoples of Africa as a world apart; I see Africa as a
fundamental part of our interconnected world -- as partners with America on behalf of the
future we want for all of our children. That partnership must be grounded in mutual
responsibility and mutual respect. And that is what I want to speak with you about today.
We must start from the simple premise that Africa's future is up to Africans.
I say this knowing full well the tragic past that has sometimes haunted this part of the
world. After all, I have the blood of Africa within me, and my family's -- my family's own story
encompasses both the tragedies and triumphs of the larger African story.
Some you know my grandfather was a cook for the British in Kenya, and though he was a
respected elder in his village, his employers called him "boy" for much of his life. He was on
the periphery of Kenya's liberation struggles, but he was still imprisoned briefly during
repressive times. In his life, colonialism wasn't simply the creation of unnatural borders or
unfair terms of trade -- it was something experienced personally, day after day, year after
year.
My father grew up herding goats in a tiny village, an impossible distance away from the
American universities where he would come to get an education. He came of age at a moment
of extraordinary promise for Africa. The struggles of his own father's generation were giving
birth to new nations, beginning right here in Ghana. Africans were educating and asserting
themselves in new ways, and history was on the move.
But despite the progress that has been made -- and there has been considerable progress in
many parts of Africa -- we also know that much of that promise has yet to be
fulfilled. Countries like Kenya had a per capita economy larger than South Korea's when I was
born. They have badly been outpaced. Disease and conflict have ravaged parts of the African
continent.
In many places, the hope of my father's generation gave way to cynicism, even despair. Now,
it's easy to point fingers and to pin the blame of these problems on others. Yes, a colonial
map that made little sense helped to breed conflict. The West has often approached Africa as
a patron or a source of resources rather than a partner. But the West is not responsible for
the destruction of the Zimbabwean economy over the last decade, or wars in which children
are enlisted as combatants. In my father's life, it was partly tribalism and patronage and
nepotism in an independent Kenya that for a long stretch derailed his career, and we know
that this kind of corruption is still a daily fact of life for far too many.
Now, we know that's also not the whole story. Here in Ghana, you show us a face of Africa
that is too often overlooked by a world that sees only tragedy or a need for charity. The
people of Ghana have worked hard to put democracy on a firmer footing, with repeated
peaceful transfers of power even in the wake of closely contested elections. And by the way,
can I say that for that the minority deserves as much credit as the majority. And with
improved governance and an emerging civil society, Ghana's economy has shown impressive
rates of growth.
This progress may lack the drama of 20th century liberation struggles, but make no
mistake: It will ultimately be more significant. For just as it is important to emerge from the
control of other nations, it is even more important to build one's own nation.
So I believe that this moment is just as promising for Ghana and for Africa as the moment
when my father came of age and new nations were being born. This is a new moment of great
promise. Only this time, we've learned that it will not be giants like Nkrumah and Kenyatta
who will determine Africa's future. Instead, it will be you -- the men and women in Ghana's
parliament -- the people you represent. It will be the young people brimming with talent and
energy and hope who can claim the future that so many in previous generations never
realized.
Now, to realize that promise, we must first recognize the fundamental truth that you have
given life to in Ghana: Development depends on good governance. That is the ingredient
which has been missing in far too many places, for far too long. That's the change that can
unlock Africa's potential. And that is a responsibility that can only be met by Africans.
As for America and the West, our commitment must be measured by more than just the
dollars we spend. I've pledged substantial increases in our foreign assistance, which is in
Africa's interests and America's interests. But the true sign of success is not whether we are a
source of perpetual aid that helps people scrape by -- it's whether we are partners in building
the capacity for transformational change.
This mutual responsibility must be the foundation of our partnership. And today, I'll focus on
four areas that are critical to the future of Africa and the entire developing world: democracy,
opportunity, health, and the peaceful resolution of conflict.
First, we must support strong and sustainable democratic governments.
As I -- As I said in Cairo, each nation gives life to democracy in its own way, and in line with
its own traditions. But history offers a clear verdict: Governments that respect the will of their
own people, that govern by consent and not coercion, are more -- more prosperous, they are
more stable, and more successful than governments that do not.
This is about more than just holding elections. It's also about what happens between
elections. Repression can take many forms, and too many nations, even those that have
elections, are plagued by problems that condemn their people to poverty. No country is going
to create wealth if its leaders exploit the economy to enrich themselves -- or -- or if police -- if
police can be bought off by drug traffickers. No business -- No business wants to invest in a
place where the government skims 20 percent off the top -- or the head of the Port Authority
is corrupt. No person wants to live in a society where the rule of law gives way to the rule of
brutality and bribery. That is not democracy, that is tyranny, even if occasionally you sprinkle
an election in there. And now is the time for that style of governance to end.
In the 21st century, capable, reliable, and transparent institutions are the key to success --
strong parliaments; honest police forces; independent judges; an independent press; a
vibrant private sector; a civil society. Those are the things that give life to democracy,
because that is what matters in people's everyday lives.
Now, time and again, Ghanaians have chosen constitutional rule over autocracy, and shown a
democratic spirit that allows the energy of your people to break through. We see that in
leaders who accept defeat graciously -- the fact that President Mills' opponents were standing
beside him last night to greet me when I came off the plane spoke volumes about Ghana;
victors who resist calls to wield power against the opposition in unfair ways. We see that spirit
in courageous journalists like Anas Aremeyaw Anas, who risked his life to report the truth. We
see it in police like Patience Quaye, who helped prosecute the first human trafficker in
Ghana. We see it in the young people who are speaking up against patronage, and
participating in the political process.
Across Africa, we've seen countless examples of people taking control of their destiny, and
making change from the bottom up. We saw it in Kenya, where civil society and business
came together to help stop post-election violence. We saw it in South Africa, where over
three-quarters of the country voted in the recent election -- the fourth since the end of
Apartheid. We saw it in Zimbabwe, where the Election Support Network braved brutal
repression to stand up for the principle that a person's vote is their sacred right.
Now, make no mistake: History is on the side of these brave Africans, not with those who use
coups or change constitutions to stay in power. Africa -- Africa doesn't need strongmen; it
needs strong institutions.
Now, America will not seek to impose any system of government on any other nation. The
essential truth of democracy is that each nation determines its own destiny. But what America
will do is increase assistance for responsible individuals and responsible institutions, with a
focus on supporting good governance -- on parliaments, which check abuses of power and
ensure that opposition voices are heard; on the rule of law, which ensures the equal
administration of justice; on civic participation, so that young people get involved; and on
concrete solutions to corruption like forensic accounting and automating services --
strengthening hotlines, protecting whistle-blowers to advance transparency and
accountability.
And we provide this support. I have directed my Administration to give greater attention to
corruption in our human rights reports. People everywhere should have the right to start a
business or get an education without paying a bribe. We have a responsibility to support
those who act responsibly and to isolate those who don't, and that is exactly what America will
do.
Now, this leads directly to our second area of partnership: supporting development that
provides opportunity for more people.
With better governance, I have no doubt that Africa holds the promise of a broader base of
prosperity. Witness the extraordinary success of Africans in my country, America. They're
doing very well. So they've got the talent, they've got the entrepreneurial spirit. The question
is, how do we make sure that they're succeeding here in their home countries? The continent
is rich in natural resources. And from cell phone entrepreneurs to small farmers, Africans have
shown the capacity and commitment to create their own opportunities. But old habits must
also be broken. Dependence on commodities -- or a single export -- has a tendency to
concentrate wealth in the hands of the few, and leaves people too vulnerable to downturns.
So in Ghana, for instance, oil brings great opportunities, and you have been very responsible
in preparing for new revenue. But as so many Ghanaians know, oil cannot simply become the
new cocoa. From South Korea to Singapore, history shows that countries thrive when they
invest in their people and in their infrastructure; when they promote multiple export
industries, develop a skilled workforce, and create space for small and medium-sized
businesses that create jobs.
As Africans reach for this promise, America will be more responsible in extending our hand. By
cutting costs that go to Western consultants and administration, we want to put more
resources in the hands of those who need it, while training people to do more for
themselves. That's why our 3.5 billion dollar food security initiative is focused on new
methods and technologies for farmers -- not simply sending American producers or goods to
Africa. Aid is not an end in itself. The purpose of foreign assistance must be creating the
conditions where it's no longer needed. I want to see Ghanaians not only self-sufficient in
food, I want to see you exporting food to other countries and earning money. You can do that.
Now, America can also do more to promote trade and investment. Wealthy nations must open
our doors to goods and services from Africa in a meaningful way. That will be a commitment
of my Administration. And where there is good governance, we can broaden prosperity
through public-private partnerships that invest in better roads and electricity; capacitybuilding
that trains people to grow a business; financial services that reach not just the cities
but also the poor and rural areas. This is also in our own interests -- for if people are lifted out
of poverty and wealth is created in Africa, guess what? New markets will open up for our own
goods. So it's good for both.
One area that holds out both undeniable peril and extraordinary promise is energy. Africa
gives off less greenhouse gas than any other part of the world, but it is the most threatened
by climate change. A warming planet will spread disease, shrink water resources, and deplete
crops, creating conditions that produce more famine and more conflict. All of us -- particularly
the developed world -- have a responsibility to slow these trends -- through mitigation, and by
changing the way that we use energy. But we can also work with Africans to turn this crisis
into opportunity.
Together, we can partner on behalf of our planet and prosperity, and help countries increase
access to power while skipping -- leapfrogging the dirtier phase of development. Think about
it: Across Africa, there is bountiful wind and solar power; geothermal energy and
biofuels. From the Rift Valley to the North African deserts; from the Western coasts to South
Africa's crops -- Africa's boundless natural gifts can generate its own power, while exporting
profitable, clean energy abroad.
These steps are about more than growth numbers on a balance sheet. They're about whether
a young person with an education can get a job that supports a family; a farmer can transfer
their goods to market; an entrepreneur with a good idea can start a business. It's about the
dignity of work; it's about the opportunity that must exist for Africans in the 21st century.
Just as governance is vital to opportunity, it's also critical to the third area I want to talk
about: strengthening public health.
In recent years, enormous progress has been made in parts of Africa. Far more people are
living productively with HIV/AIDS, and getting the drugs they need. I just saw a wonderful
clinic and hospital that is focused particularly on maternal health. But too many still die from
diseases that shouldn't kill them. When children are being killed because of a mosquito bite,
and mothers are dying in childbirth, then we know that more progress must be made.
Yet because of incentives -- often provided by donor nations -- many African doctors and
nurses go overseas, or work for programs that focus on a single disease. And this creates
gaps in primary care and basic prevention. Meanwhile, individual Africans also have to make
responsible choices that prevent the spread of disease, while promoting public health in their
communities and countries.
So across Africa, we see examples of people tackling these problems. In Nigeria, an Interfaith
effort of Christians and Muslims has set an example of cooperation to confront malaria. Here
in Ghana and across Africa, we see innovative ideas for filling gaps in care -- for instance,
through E-Health initiatives that allow doctors in big cities to support those in small towns.
America will support these efforts through a comprehensive, global health strategy, because
in the 21st century, we are called to act by our conscience but also by our common interest,
because when a child dies of a preventable disease in Accra, that diminishes us
everywhere. And when disease goes unchecked in any corner of the world, we know that it
can spread across oceans and continents.
And that's why my Administration has committed 63 billion dollars to meet these challenges --
63 billion dollars. Building on the strong efforts of President Bush, we will carry forward the
fight against HIV/AIDS. We will pursue the goal of ending deaths from malaria and
tuberculosis, and we will work to eradicate polio. We will fight -- we will fight neglected
tropical disease. And we won't confront illnesses in isolation -- we will invest in public health
systems that promote wellness and focus on the health of mothers and children.
Now, as we partner on behalf of a healthier future, we must also stop the destruction that
comes not from illness, but from human beings -- and so the final area that I will address is
conflict.
Let me be clear: Africa is not the crude caricature of a continent at perpetual war. But if we
are honest, for far too many Africans, conflict is a part of life, as constant as the sun. There
are wars over land and wars over resources. And it is still far too easy for those without
conscience to manipulate whole communities into fighting among faiths and tribes.
These conflicts are a millstone around Africa's neck. Now, we all have many identities -- of
tribe and ethnicity; of religion and nationality. But defining oneself in opposition to someone
who belongs to a different tribe, or who worships a different prophet, has no place in the 21st
century. Africa's diversity should be a source of strength, not a cause for division. We are all
God's children. We all share common aspirations -- to live in peace and security; to access
education and opportunity; to love our families and our communities and our faith. That is our
common humanity.
That is why we must stand up to inhumanity in our midst. It is never justified -- never
justifiable to target innocents in the name of ideology. It is the death sentence of a society to
force children to kill in wars. It is the ultimate mark of criminality and cowardice to condemn
women to relentless and systemic rape. We must bear witness to the value of every child in
Darfur and the dignity of every woman in the Congo. No faith or culture should condone the
outrages against them. And all of us must strive for the peace and security necessary for
progress.
Africans are standing up for this future. Here, too, in Ghana we are seeing you help point the
way forward. Ghanaians should take pride in your contributions to peacekeeping from Congo
to Liberia to Lebanon -- and your efforts to resist the scourge of the drug trade. We welcome
the steps that are being taken by organizations like the African Union and ECOWAS to better
resolve conflicts, to keep the peace, and support those in need. And we encourage the vision
of a strong, regional security architecture that can bring effective, transnational forces to bear
when needed.
America has a responsibility to work with you as a partner to advance this vision, not just with
words, but with support that strengthens African capacity. When there's a genocide in Darfur
or terrorists in Somalia, these are not simply African problems -- they are global security
challenges, and they demand a global response.
And that's why we stand ready to partner through diplomacy and technical assistance and
logistical support, and we will stand behind efforts to hold war criminals accountable. And let
me be clear: Our Africa Command is focused not on establishing a foothold in the continent,
but on confronting these common challenges to advance the security of America, Africa, and
the world.
In Moscow, I spoke of the need for an international system where the universal rights of
human beings are respected, and violations of those rights are opposed. And that must
include a commitment to support those who resolve conflicts peacefully, to sanction and stop
those who don't, and to help those who have suffered. But ultimately, it will be vibrant
democracies like Botswana and Ghana which roll back the causes of conflict and advance the
frontiers of peace and prosperity.
As I said earlier, Africa's future is up to Africans.
The people of Africa are ready to claim that future. And in my country, African Americans --
including so many recent immigrants -- have thrived in every sector of society. We've done so
despite a difficult past, and we've drawn strength from our African heritage. With strong
institutions and a strong will, I know that Africans can live their dreams in Nairobi and Lagos,
Kigali, Kinshasa, Harare, and right here in Accra.
You know, 52 years ago, the eyes of the world were on Ghana. And a young preacher named
Martin Luther King traveled here, to Accra, to watch the Union Jack come down and the
Ghanaian flag go up. This was before the march on Washington or the success of the civil
rights movement in my country. Dr. King was asked how he felt while watching the birth of a
nation. And he said: "It renews my conviction in the ultimate triumph of justice."1
Now that triumph must be won once more, and it must be won by you. And I am particularly
speaking to the young people all across Africa and right here in Ghana. In places like Ghana,
young people make up over half of the population.
And here is what you must know: The world will be what you make of it. You have the power
to hold your leaders accountable, and to build institutions that serve the people. You can
serve in your communities, and harness your energy and education to create new wealth and
build new connections to the world. 
You can conquer disease, and end conflicts, and make change from the bottom up. You can do
that. Yes you can -- because in this moment, history is on the move.
But these things can only be done if all of you take responsibility for your future. And it won't
be easy. It will take time and effort. There will be suffering and setbacks. But I can promise
you this: America will be with you every step of the way -- as a partner, as a
friend. Opportunity won't come from any other place, though. It must come from the
decisions that all of you make, the things that you do, the hope that you hold in your heart.
Ghana, freedom is your inheritance. Now, it is your responsibility to build upon freedom's
foundation. And if you do, we will look back years from now to places like Accra and say this
was the time when the promise was realized; this was the moment when prosperity was
forged, when pain was overcome, and a new era of progress began. This can be the time
when we witness the triumph of justice once more.
Yes we can.
Thank you very much. God bless you.
Thank you.