Good morning, everybody. I've just been briefed by my national security team, including FBI
Director Mueller, Attorney General Holder, Secretary Napolitano, and my Counterterrorism and
Homeland Security Advisor Lisa Monaco, on the attacks in Boston. We continue to mobilize
and deploy all appropriate law enforcement resources to protect our citizens, and to
investigate and to respond to this attack.
Obviously our first thoughts this morning are with the victims, their families, and the city of
Boston. We know that two explosions gravely wounded dozens of Americans, and took the
lives of others, including a 8-year-old boy.
This was a heinous and cowardly act. And given what we now know about what took place,
the FBI is investigating it as an act of terrorism. Any time bombs are used to target innocent
civilians it is an act of terror. What we don’t yet know, however, is who carried out this
attack, or why; whether it was planned and executed by a terrorist organization, foreign or
domestic, or was the act of a malevolent individual. That's what we don't yet know. And
clearly, we’re at the beginning of our investigation.
It will take time to follow every lead and determine what happened. But we will find out. We
will find whoever harmed our citizens and we will bring them to justice.We also know this -- the American people refuse to be terrorized. Because what the world
saw yesterday in the aftermath of the explosions were stories of heroism and kindness, and
generosity and love: Exhausted runners who kept running to the nearest hospital to give
blood, and those who stayed to tend to the wounded, some tearing off their own clothes to
make tourniquets. The first responders who ran into the chaos to save lives. The men and
women who are still treating the wounded at some of the best hospitals in the world, and the
medical students who hurried to help, saying “When we heard, we all came in.” The priests
who opened their churches and ministered to the hurt and the fearful. And the good people of
Boston who opened their homes to the victims of this attack and those shaken by it.
So if you want to know who we are, what America is, how we respond to evil -- that’s it.
 Selflessly. Compassionately. Unafraid.
In the coming days, we will pursue every effort to get to the bottom of what happened. And
we will continue to remain vigilant. I’ve directed my administration to take appropriate
security measures to protect the American people. And this is a good time for all of us to
remember that we all have a part to play in alerting authorities -- if you see something
suspicious, speak up.
I have extraordinary confidence in the men and women of the FBI, the Boston Police
Department, and the other agencies that responded so heroically and effectively in the
aftermath of yesterday’s events. I’m very grateful for the leadership of Governor Patrick and
Mayor Menino. And I know that even as we protect our people and aggressively pursue this
investigation, the people of Boston will continue to respond in the same proud and heroic way
that they have thus far -- and their fellow Americans will be right there with them.
Thank you very much. And you can expect further briefings from our law enforcement
officials as the day goes on. When we have more details, they will be disclosed. What I’ve
indicated to you is what we know now. We know it was bombs that were set off. We know
that obviously they did some severe damage. We do not know who did them. We do not
know whether this was an act of an organization or an individual or individuals. We don’t
have a sense of motive yet. So everything else at this point is speculation. But as we receive
more information, as the FBI has more information, as our out counterterrorism teams have
more information, we will make sure to keep you and the American people posted.
Thank you very much, everybody.
A few months ago, in response to too many tragedies -- including the shootings of a United
States Congresswoman, Gabby Giffords, who’s here today, and the murder of 20 innocent
schoolchildren and their teachers -- this country took up the cause of protecting more of our
people from gun violence.
Families that know unspeakable grief summoned the courage to petition their elected leaders
-- not just to honor the memory of their children, but to protect the lives of all our children.
And a few minutes ago, a minority in the United States Senate decided it wasn’t worth it.
They blocked common-sense gun reforms even while these families looked on from the
Senate gallery.
By now, it’s well known that 90 percent of the American people support universal background
checks that make it harder for a dangerous person to buy a gun. We’re talking about
convicted felons, people convicted of domestic violence, people with a severe mental illness.
 Ninety percent of Americans support that idea. Most Americans think that's already the law.
And a few minutes ago, 90 percent of Democrats in the Senate just voted for that idea. But
it’s not going to happen because 90 percent of Republicans in the Senate just voted against
that idea.A majority of senators voted "yes" to protecting more of our citizens with smarter background
checks. But by this continuing distortion of Senate rules, a minority was able to block it from
moving forward.
I’m going to speak plainly and honestly about what’s happened here because the American
people are trying to figure out how can something have 90 percent support and yet not
happen. We had a Democrat and a Republican -- both gun owners, both fierce defenders of
our Second Amendment, with “A” grades from the NRA -- come together and worked together
to write a common-sense compromise on background checks. And I want to thank Joe
Manchin and Pat Toomey for their courage in doing that. That was not easy given their
traditional strong support for Second Amendment rights.
As they said, nobody could honestly claim that the package they put together infringed on our
Second Amendment rights. All it did was extend the same background check rules that
already apply to guns purchased from a dealer to guns purchased at gun shows or over the
Internet. So 60 percent of guns are already purchased through a background check system;
this would have covered a lot of the guns that are currently outside that system.
Their legislation showed respect for gun owners, and it showed respect for the victims of gun
violence. And Gabby Giffords, by the way, is both -- she’s a gun owner and a victim of gun
violence. She is a Westerner and a moderate. And she supports these background checks.
In fact, even the NRA used to support expanded background checks. The current leader of
the NRA used to support these background checks. So while this compromise didn’t contain
everything I wanted or everything that these families wanted, it did represent progress. It
represented moderation and common sense. That’s why 90 percent of the American people
supported it.
But instead of supporting this compromise, the gun lobby and its allies willfully lied about the
bill. They claimed that it would create some sort of "big brother" gun registry, even though
the bill did the opposite. This legislation, in fact, outlawed any registry. Plain and simple,
right there in the text. But that didn’t matter.
And unfortunately, this pattern of spreading untruths about this legislation served a purpose,
because those lies upset an intense minority of gun owners, and that in turn intimidated a lot
of senators. And I talked to several of these senators over the past few weeks, and they’re all
good people. I know all of them were shocked by tragedies like Newtown. And I also
understand that they come from states that are strongly pro-gun. And I have consistently said
that there are regional differences when it comes to guns, and that both sides have to listen
to each other.
But the fact is most of these senators could not offer any good reason why we wouldn’t want
to make it harder for criminals and those with severe mental illnesses to buy a gun. There
were no coherent arguments as to why we wouldn’t do this. It came down to politics -- the worry that that vocal minority of gun owners would come after
them in future elections. They worried that the gun lobby would spend a lot of money and
paint them as anti-Second Amendment.
And obviously, a lot of Republicans had that fear, but Democrats had that fear, too. And so
they caved to the pressure, and they started looking for an excuse -- any excuse -- to vote
"no."
One common argument I heard was that this legislation wouldn’t prevent all future
massacres. And that’s true. As I said from the start, no single piece of legislation can stop
every act of violence and evil. We learned that tragically just two days ago. But if action by
Congress could have saved one person, one child, a few hundred, a few thousand -- if it could
have prevented those people from losing their lives to gun violence in the future while
preserving our Second Amendment rights, we had an obligation to try.
And this legislation met that test. And too many senators failed theirs.
I've heard some say that blocking this step would be a victory. And my question is, a victory
for who? A victory for what? All that happened today was the preservation of the loophole
that lets dangerous criminals buy guns without a background check. That didn’t make our
kids safer. Victory for not doing something that 90 percent of Americans, 80 percent of
Republicans, the vast majority of your constituents wanted to get done? It begs the question,
who are we here to represent?
I've heard folks say that having the families of victims lobby for this legislation was somehow
misplaced. "A prop," somebody called them. "Emotional blackmail," some outlet said. Are
they serious? Do we really think that thousands of families whose lives have been shattered
by gun violence don’t have a right to weigh in on this issue? Do we think their emotions, their
loss is not relevant to this debate?
So all in all, this was a pretty shameful day for Washington.
But this effort is not over. I want to make it clear to the American people we can still bring
about meaningful changes that reduce gun violence, so long as the American people don’t
give up on it. Even without Congress, my administration will keep doing everything it can to
protect more of our communities. We’re going to address the barriers that prevent states
from participating in the existing background check system. We’re going to give law
enforcement more information about lost and stolen guns so it can do its job. We’re going to
help to put in place emergency plans to protect our children in their schools.
But we can do more if Congress gets its act together. And if this Congress refuses to listen to
the American people and pass common-sense gun legislation, then the real impact is going to
have to come from the voters.To all the people who supported this legislation -- law enforcement and responsible gun
owners, Democrats and Republicans, urban moms, rural hunters, whoever you are -- you
need to let your representatives in Congress know that you are disappointed, and that if they
don’t act this time, you will remember come election time.
To the wide majority of NRA households who supported this legislation, you need to let your
leadership and lobbyists in Washington know they didn’t represent your views on this one.
The point is those who care deeply about preventing more and more gun violence will have to
be as passionate, and as organized, and as vocal as those who blocked these common-sense
steps to help keep our kids safe. Ultimately, you outnumber those who argued the other
way. But they're better organized. They're better financed. They’ve been at it longer. And
they make sure to stay focused on this one issue during election time. And that's the reason
why you can have something that 90 percent of Americans support and you can't get it
through the Senate or the House of Representatives.
So to change Washington, you, the American people, are going to have to sustain some
passion about this. And when necessary, you’ve got to send the right people to Washington.
And that requires strength, and it requires persistence.
And that's the one thing that these families should have inspired in all of us. I still don't know
how they have been able to muster up the strength to do what they’ve doing over the last
several weeks, last several months.
And I see this as just round one. When Newtown happened, I met with these families and I
spoke to the community, and I said, something must be different right now. We’re going to
have to change. That's what the whole country said. Everybody talked about how we were
going to change something to make sure this didn't happen again, just like everybody talked
about how we needed to do something after Aurora. Everybody talked about we needed
change something after Tucson.
And I’m assuming that the emotions that we’ve all felt since Newtown, the emotions that
we’ve all felt since Tucson and Aurora and Chicago -- the pain we share with these families
and families all across the country who’ve lost a loved one to gun violence -- I’m assuming
that's not a temporary thing. I’m assuming our expressions of grief and our commitment to
do something different to prevent these things from happening are not empty words.
I believe we’re going to be able to get this done. Sooner or later, we are going to get this
right. The memories of these children demand it. And so do the American people.
Thank you very much, everybody.