Well. It is good to be back in Las Vegas. And it is good to be among so many good friends.

Let me start off by thanking everybody at Del Sol High School for hosting us. Go Dragons!
Let me especially thank your outstanding principal, Lisa Primas.
There are all kinds of notable guests here, but I just want to mention a few. First of all, our
outstanding Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, Janet Napolitano, is here. Our
wonderful Secretary of the Interior, Ken Salazar. Former Secretary of Labor, Hilda Solis. Two
of the outstanding members of the congressional delegation from Nevada, Steve Horsford and
Dina Titus. Your own mayor, Carolyn Goodman.
But we also have some mayors that flew in because they know how important the issue we’re
going to talk about today is. Marie Lopez Rogers from Avondale, Arizona. Kasim Reed from
Atlanta, Georgia. Greg Stanton from Phoenix, Arizona. And Ashley Swearengin from Fresno,
California.

And all of you are here, as well as some of the top labor leaders in the country. And we are
just so grateful. Some outstanding business leaders are here as well. And of course, we’ve
got wonderful students here, so I could not be prouder of our students.
Now, those of you have a seat, feel free to take a seat. I don’t mind.I love you back.
Now, last week, I had the honor of being sworn in for a second term as President of the
United States. And during my inaugural address, I talked about how making progress on the
defining challenges of our time doesn’t require us to settle every debate or ignore every
difference that we may have, but it does require us to find common ground and move forward
in common purpose. It requires us to act.
I know that some issues will be harder to lift than others. Some debates will be more
contentious. That’s to be expected. But the reason I came here today is because of a
challenge where the differences are dwindling; where a broad consensus is emerging; and
where a call for action can now be heard coming from all across America. I’m here today
because the time has come for common-sense, comprehensive immigration reform. The time
is now. Now is the time. Now is the time. Now is the time.Now is the time.
I’m here because most Americans agree that it’s time to fix a system that’s been broken for
way too long. I’m here because business leaders, faith leaders, labor leaders, law
enforcement, and leaders from both parties are coming together to say now is the time to find
a better way to welcome the striving, hopeful immigrants who still see America as the land of
opportunity. Now is the time to do this so we can strengthen our economy and strengthen
our country’s future.
Think about it -- we define ourselves as a nation of immigrants. That’s who we are -- in our
bones. The promise we see in those who come here from every corner of the globe, that’s
always been one of our greatest strengths. It keeps our workforce young. It keeps our
country on the cutting edge. And it’s helped build the greatest economic engine the world has
ever known.
After all, immigrants helped start businesses like Google and Yahoo!. They created entire new
industries that, in turn, created new jobs and new prosperity for our citizens. In recent years,
one in four high-tech startups in America were founded by immigrants. One in four new small
business owners were immigrants, including right here in Nevada -- folks who came here
seeking opportunity and now want to share that opportunity with other Americans.
But we all know that today, we have an immigration system that’s out of date and badly
broken; a system that’s holding us back instead of helping us grow our economy and
strengthen our middle class.Right now, we have 11 million undocumented immigrants in America; 11 million men and
women from all over the world who live their lives in the shadows. Yes, they broke the rules.
They crossed the border illegally. Maybe they overstayed their visas. Those are facts.
Nobody disputes them. But these 11 million men and women are now here. Many of them
have been here for years. And the overwhelming majority of these individuals aren’t looking
for any trouble. They’re contributing members of the community. They're looking out for
their families. They're looking out for their neighbors. They're woven into the fabric of our
lives.
Every day, like the rest of us, they go out and try to earn a living. Often they do that in a
shadow economy -- a place where employers may offer them less than the minimum wage or
make them work overtime without extra pay. And when that happens, it’s not just bad for
them, it’s bad for the entire economy. Because all the businesses that are trying to do the
right thing -- that are hiring people legally, paying a decent wage, following the rules --
they’re the ones who suffer. They've got to compete against companies that are breaking the
rules. And the wages and working conditions of American workers are threatened, too.
So if we're truly committed to strengthening our middle class and providing more ladders of
opportunity to those who are willing to work hard to make it into the middle class, we've got
to fix the system.
We have to make sure that every business and every worker in America is playing by the
same set of rules. We have to bring this shadow economy into the light so that everybody is
held accountable -- businesses for who they hire, and immigrants for getting on the right side
of the law. That’s common sense. And that’s why we need comprehensive immigration
reform.
There’s another economic reason why we need reform. It’s not just about the folks who come
here illegally and have the effect they have on our economy. It’s also about the folks who try
to come here legally but have a hard time doing so, and the effect that has on our economy.
Right now, there are brilliant students from all over the world sitting in classrooms at our top
universities. They’re earning degrees in the fields of the future, like engineering and
computer science. But once they finish school, once they earn that diploma, there’s a good
chance they’ll have to leave our country. Think about that.
Intel was started with the help of an immigrant who studied here and then stayed here.
Instagram was started with the help of an immigrant who studied here and then stayed here.
Right now in one of those classrooms, there’s a student wrestling with how to turn their big
idea -- their Intel or Instagram -- into a big business. We’re giving them all the skills they
need to figure that out, but then we’re going to turn around and tell them to start that
business and create those jobs in China or India or Mexico or someplace else? That’s not how
you grow new industries in America. That’s how you give new industries to our competitors.
That’s why we need comprehensive immigration reform.Now, during my first term, we took steps to try and patch up some of the worst cracks in the
system.

First, we strengthened security at the borders so that we could finally stem the tide of illegal
immigrants. We put more boots on the ground on the southern border than at any time in our
history. And today, illegal crossings are down nearly 80 percent from their peak in 2000.
Second, we focused our enforcement efforts on criminals who are here illegally and who
endanger our communities. And today, deportations of criminals is at its highest level ever.
And third, we took up the cause of the DREAMers -- the young people who were brought to
this country as children, young people who have grown up here, built their lives here, have
futures here. We said that if you’re able to meet some basic criteria like pursuing an
education, then we’ll consider offering you the chance to come out of the shadows so that you
can live here and work here legally, so that you can finally have the dignity of knowing you
belong.
But because this change isn’t permanent, we need Congress to act -- and not just on the
DREAM Act. We need Congress to act on a comprehensive approach that finally deals with the
11 million undocumented immigrants who are in the country right now. That's what we need.
Now, the good news is that for the first time in many years, Republicans and Democrats seem
ready to tackle this problem together. Members of both parties, in both chambers, are
actively working on a solution. Yesterday, a bipartisan group of senators announced their
principles for comprehensive immigration reform, which are very much in line with the
principles I’ve proposed and campaigned on for the last few years. So at this moment, it
looks like there’s a genuine desire to get this done soon, and that’s very encouraging.
But this time, action must follow. We can't allow immigration reform to get bogged down in
an endless debate. We've been debating this a very long time. So it's not as if we don't know
technically what needs to get done. As a consequence, to help move this process along,
today I’m laying out my ideas for immigration reform. And my hope is that this provides
some key markers to members of Congress as they craft a bill, because the ideas I’m
proposing have traditionally been supported by both Democrats like Ted Kennedy and
Republicans like President George W. Bush. You don't get that matchup very often. So we
know where the consensus should be.
Now, of course, there will be rigorous debate about many of the details, and every
stakeholder should engage in real give and take in the process. But it’s important for us to
recognize that the foundation for bipartisan action is already in place. And if Congress is
unable to move forward in a timely fashion, I will send up a bill based on my proposal and
insist that they vote on it right away.So the principles are pretty straightforward. There are a lot of details behind it. We're going
to hand out a bunch of paper so that everybody will know exactly what we're talking about.
But the principles are pretty straightforward.
First, I believe we need to stay focused on enforcement. That means continuing to strengthen
security at our borders. It means cracking down more forcefully on businesses that knowingly
hire undocumented workers. To be fair, most businesses want to do the right thing, but a lot
of them have a hard time figuring out who’s here legally, who’s not. So we need to
implement a national system that allows businesses to quickly and accurately verify
someone’s employment status. And if they still knowingly hire undocumented workers, then
we need to ramp up the penalties.
Second, we have to deal with the 11 million individuals who are here illegally. We all agree
that these men and women should have to earn their way to citizenship. But for
comprehensive immigration reform to work, it must be clear from the outset that there is a
pathway to citizenship.
We’ve got to lay out a path -- a process that includes passing a background check, paying
taxes, paying a penalty, learning English, and then going to the back of the line, behind all the
folks who are trying to come here legally. That's only fair, right?
So that means it won’t be a quick process but it will be a fair process. And it will lift these
individuals out of the shadows and give them a chance to earn their way to a green card and
eventually to citizenship.
And the third principle is we’ve got to bring our legal immigration system into the 21st century
because it no longer reflects the realities of our time. For example, if you are a citizen, you
shouldn’t have to wait years before your family is able to join you in America. You shouldn't
have to wait years.If you’re a foreign student who wants to pursue a career in science or technology, or a foreign
entrepreneur who wants to start a business with the backing of American investors, we should
help you do that here. Because if you succeed, you’ll create American businesses and
American jobs. You’ll help us grow our economy. You’ll help us strengthen our middle class.
So that’s what comprehensive immigration reform looks like: smarter enforcement; a
pathway to earned citizenship; improvements in the legal immigration system so that we
continue to be a magnet for the best and the brightest all around the world. It’s pretty
straightforward.
The question now is simple: Do we have the resolve as a people, as a country, as a
government to finally put this issue behind us? I believe that we do. I believe that we do. I
believe we are finally at a moment where comprehensive immigration reform is within our
grasp.But I promise you this: The closer we get, the more emotional this debate is going to
become. Immigration has always been an issue that enflames passions. That’s not
surprising. There are few things that are more important to us as a society than who gets to
come here and call our country home; who gets the privilege of becoming a citizen of the
United States of America. That's a big deal.
When we talk about that in the abstract, it’s easy sometimes for the discussion to take on a
feeling of “us” versus “them.” And when that happens, a lot of folks forget that most of “us”
used to be “them.” We forget that.
It’s really important for us to remember our history. Unless you’re one of the first Americans,
a Native American, you came from someplace else. Somebody brought you.
Ken Salazar, he’s of Mexican American descent, but he points that his family has been living
where he lives for 400 years, so he didn't immigrate anywhere.
The Irish who left behind a land of famine. The Germans who fled persecution. The
Scandinavians who arrived eager to pioneer out west. The Polish. The Russians. The
Italians. The Chinese. The Japanese. The West Indians. The huddled masses who came
through Ellis Island on one coast and Angel Island on the other. All those folks, before they
were “us,” they were “them.”

And when each new wave of immigrants arrived, they faced resistance from those who were
already here. They faced hardship. They faced racism. They faced ridicule. But over time,
as they went about their daily lives, as they earned a living, as they raised a family, as they
built a community, as their kids went to school here, they did their part to build a nation. They were the Einsteins and the Carnegies. But they were also the millions of women and
men whose names history may not remember, but whose actions helped make us who we
are; who built this country hand by hand, brick by brick. They all came here knowing that
what makes somebody an American is not just blood or birth, but allegiance to our founding
principles and the faith in the idea that anyone from anywhere can write the next great
chapter of our story.
And that’s still true today. Just ask Alan Aleman. Alan is here this afternoon -- where is
Alan? He's around here -- there he is right here. Alan was born in Mexico. He was brought to
this country by his parents when he was a child. Growing up, Alan went to an American
school, pledged allegiance to the American flag, felt American in every way -- and he was,
except for one: on paper.
In high school, Alan watched his friends come of age -- driving around town with their new
licenses, earning some extra cash from their summer jobs at the mall. He knew he couldn’t
do those things. But it didn’t matter that much. What mattered to Alan was earning an
education so that he could live up to his God-given potential.Last year, when Alan heard the news that we were going to offer a chance for folks like him to
emerge from the shadows -- even if it's just for two years at a time -- he was one of the first
to sign up. And a few months ago he was one of the first people in Nevada to get approved.
In that moment, Alan said, “I felt the fear vanish. I felt accepted.”

So today, Alan is in his second year at the College of Southern Nevada. Alan is studying to
become a doctor. He hopes to join the Air Force. He’s working hard every single day to build
a better life for himself and his family. And all he wants is the opportunity to do his part to
build a better America.
So in the coming weeks, as the idea of reform becomes more real and the debate becomes
more heated, and there are folks who are trying to pull this thing apart, remember Alan and
all those who share the same hopes and the same dreams. Remember that this is not just a
debate about policy. It’s about people. It’s about men and women and young people who
want nothing more than the chance to earn their way into the American story.

Throughout our history, that has only made our nation stronger. And it’s how we will make
sure that this century is the same as the last: an American century welcoming of everybody
who aspires to do something more, and who is willing to work hard to do it, and is willing to
pledge that allegiance to our flag.

Thank you. God bless you. And God bless the United States of America.Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, members of Congress, fellow citizens:
Fifty-one years ago, John F. Kennedy declared to this chamber that “the Constitution makes
us not rivals for power but partners for progress.” “It is my task,” he said, “to report the
State of the Union -- to improve it is the task of us all.”
Tonight, thanks to the grit and determination of the American people, there is much progress
to report. After a decade of grinding war, our brave men and women in uniform are coming
home. After years of grueling recession, our businesses have created over six million new
jobs. We buy more American cars than we have in five years, and less foreign oil than we
have in 20. Our housing market is healing, our stock market is rebounding, and consumers,
patients, and homeowners enjoy stronger protections than ever before.
So, together, we have cleared away the rubble of crisis, and we can say with renewed
confidence that the State of our Union is stronger.
But we gather here knowing that there are millions of Americans whose hard work and
dedication have not yet been rewarded. Our economy is adding jobs -- but too many people
still can’t find full-time employment. Corporate profits have skyrocketed to all-time highs --
but for more than a decade, wages and incomes have barely budged.
It is our generation’s task, then, to reignite the true engine of America’s economic growth -- a
rising, thriving middle class.

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, members of Congress, fellow citizens:
Fifty-one years ago, John F. Kennedy declared to this chamber that “the Constitution makes
us not rivals for power but partners for progress.” “It is my task,” he said, “to report the
State of the Union -- to improve it is the task of us all.”
Tonight, thanks to the grit and determination of the American people, there is much progress
to report. After a decade of grinding war, our brave men and women in uniform are coming
home. After years of grueling recession, our businesses have created over six million new
jobs. We buy more American cars than we have in five years, and less foreign oil than we
have in 20. Our housing market is healing, our stock market is rebounding, and consumers,
patients, and homeowners enjoy stronger protections than ever before.
So, together, we have cleared away the rubble of crisis, and we can say with renewed
confidence that the State of our Union is stronger.
But we gather here knowing that there are millions of Americans whose hard work and
dedication have not yet been rewarded. Our economy is adding jobs -- but too many people
still can’t find full-time employment. Corporate profits have skyrocketed to all-time highs --
but for more than a decade, wages and incomes have barely budged.
It is our generation’s task, then, to reignite the true engine of America’s economic growth -- a
rising, thriving middle class.It is our unfinished task to restore the basic bargain that built this country -- the idea that if
you work hard and meet your responsibilities, you can get ahead, no matter where you come
from, no matter what you look like, or who you love.
It is our unfinished task to make sure that this government works on behalf of the many, and
not just the few; that it encourages free enterprise, rewards individual initiative, and opens
the doors of opportunity to every child across this great nation.
The American people don’t expect government to solve every problem. They don’t expect
those of us in this chamber to agree on every issue. But they do expect us to put the nation’s
interests before party. They do expect us to forge reasonable compromise where we can. For
they know that America moves forward only when we do so together, and that the
responsibility of improving this union remains the task of us all.
Our work must begin by making some basic decisions about our budget -- decisions that will
have a huge impact on the strength of our recovery.
Over the last few years, both parties have worked together to reduce the deficit by more than
$2.5 trillion -- mostly through spending cuts, but also by raising tax rates on the wealthiest 1
percent of Americans. As a result, we are more than halfway towards the goal of $4 trillion in
deficit reduction that economists say we need to stabilize our finances.
Now we need to finish the job. And the question is, how?
In 2011, Congress passed a law saying that if both parties couldn’t agree on a plan to reach
our deficit goal, about a trillion dollars’ worth of budget cuts would automatically go into effect
this year. These sudden, harsh, arbitrary cuts would jeopardize our military readiness.
 They’d devastate priorities like education, and energy, and medical research. They would
certainly slow our recovery, and cost us hundreds of thousands of jobs. That’s why
Democrats, Republicans, business leaders, and economists have already said that these cuts,
known here in Washington as the sequester, are a really bad idea.
Now, some in Congress have proposed preventing only the defense cuts by making even
bigger cuts to things like education and job training, Medicare and Social Security benefits.
 That idea is even worse.
Yes, the biggest driver of our long-term debt is the rising cost of health care for an aging
population. And those of us who care deeply about programs like Medicare must embrace the
need for modest reforms -- otherwise, our retirement programs will crowd out the
investments we need for our children, and jeopardize the promise of a secure retirement for
future generations.But we can’t ask senior citizens and working families to shoulder the entire burden of deficit
reduction while asking nothing more from the wealthiest and the most powerful. We won’t
grow the middle class simply by shifting the cost of health care or college onto families that
are already struggling, or by forcing communities to lay off more teachers and more cops and
more firefighters. Most Americans -- Democrats, Republicans, and independents --
understand that we can’t just cut our way to prosperity. They know that broad-based
economic growth requires a balanced approach to deficit reduction, with spending cuts and
revenue, and with everybody doing their fair share. And that’s the approach I offer tonight.
On Medicare, I’m prepared to enact reforms that will achieve the same amount of health care
savings by the beginning of the next decade as the reforms proposed by the bipartisan
Simpson-Bowles commission.
Already, the Affordable Care Act is helping to slow the growth of health care costs. And the
reforms I’m proposing go even further. We’ll reduce taxpayer subsidies to prescription drug
companies and ask more from the wealthiest seniors. We’ll bring down costs by changing the
way our government pays for Medicare, because our medical bills shouldn’t be based on the
number of tests ordered or days spent in the hospital; they should be based on the quality of
care that our seniors receive. And I am open to additional reforms from both parties, so long
as they don’t violate the guarantee of a secure retirement. Our government shouldn’t make
promises we cannot keep -- but we must keep the promises we’ve already made.
To hit the rest of our deficit reduction target, we should do what leaders in both parties have
already suggested, and save hundreds of billions of dollars by getting rid of tax loopholes and
deductions for the well-off and the well-connected. After all, why would we choose to make
deeper cuts to education and Medicare just to protect special interest tax breaks? How is that
fair? Why is it that deficit reduction is a big emergency justifying making cuts in Social
Security benefits but not closing some loopholes? How does that promote growth?
Now is our best chance for bipartisan, comprehensive tax reform that encourages job creation
and helps bring down the deficit. We can get this done. The American people deserve a tax
code that helps small businesses spend less time filling out complicated forms, and more time
expanding and hiring -- a tax code that ensures billionaires with high-powered accountants
can’t work the system and pay a lower rate than their hardworking secretaries; a tax code
that lowers incentives to move jobs overseas, and lowers tax rates for businesses and
manufacturers that are creating jobs right here in the United States of America. That’s what
tax reform can deliver. That’s what we can do together.
I realize that tax reform and entitlement reform will not be easy. The politics will be hard for
both sides. None of us will get 100 percent of what we want. But the alternative will cost us
jobs, hurt our economy, visit hardship on millions of hardworking Americans. So let’s set
party interests aside and work to pass a budget that replaces reckless cuts with smart savings
and wise investments in our future. And let’s do it without the brinksmanship that stresses consumers and scares off investors.
 The greatest nation on Earth cannot keep conducting its business by drifting from one
manufactured crisis to the next. We can't do it.
Let’s agree right here, right now to keep the people’s government open, and pay our bills on
time, and always uphold the full faith and credit of the United States of America. The
American people have worked too hard, for too long, rebuilding from one crisis to see their
elected officials cause another.
Now, most of us agree that a plan to reduce the deficit must be part of our agenda. But let’s
be clear, deficit reduction alone is not an economic plan. A growing economy that creates
good, middle-class jobs -- that must be the North Star that guides our efforts. Every day, we
should ask ourselves three questions as a nation: How do we attract more jobs to our shores?
 How do we equip our people with the skills they need to get those jobs? And how do we
make sure that hard work leads to a decent living?
A year and a half ago, I put forward an American Jobs Act that independent economists said
would create more than 1 million new jobs. And I thank the last Congress for passing some of
that agenda. I urge this Congress to pass the rest. But tonight, I’ll lay out additional
proposals that are fully paid for and fully consistent with the budget framework both parties
agreed to just 18 months ago. Let me repeat -- nothing I’m proposing tonight should
increase our deficit by a single dime. It is not a bigger government we need, but a smarter
government that sets priorities and invests in broad-based growth. That's what we should be
looking for.
Our first priority is making America a magnet for new jobs and manufacturing. After shedding
jobs for more than 10 years, our manufacturers have added about 500,000 jobs over the past
three. Caterpillar is bringing jobs back from Japan. Ford is bringing jobs back from Mexico.
 And this year, Apple will start making Macs in America again.
There are things we can do, right now, to accelerate this trend. Last year, we created our first
manufacturing innovation institute in Youngstown, Ohio. A once-shuttered warehouse is now
a state-of-the art lab where new workers are mastering the 3D printing that has the potential
to revolutionize the way we make almost everything. There’s no reason this can’t happen in
other towns.
So tonight, I’m announcing the launch of three more of these manufacturing hubs, where
businesses will partner with the Department of Defense and Energy to turn regions left behind
by globalization into global centers of high-tech jobs. And I ask this Congress to help create a
network of 15 of these hubs and guarantee that the next revolution in manufacturing is made
right here in America. We can get that done.
Now, if we want to make the best products, we also have to invest in the best ideas. Every
dollar we invested to map the human genome returned $140 to our economy -- every dollar. Today, our scientists are mapping the human brain to unlock the answers to Alzheimer’s.
They’re developing drugs to regenerate damaged organs; devising new material to make
batteries 10 times more powerful. Now is not the time to gut these job-creating investments
in science and innovation. Now is the time to reach a level of research and development not
seen since the height of the Space Race. We need to make those investments.
Today, no area holds more promise than our investments in American energy. After years of
talking about it, we’re finally poised to control our own energy future. We produce more oil at
home than we have in 15 years. We have doubled the distance our cars will go on a gallon of
gas, and the amount of renewable energy we generate from sources like wind and solar --
with tens of thousands of good American jobs to show for it. We produce more natural gas
than ever before -- and nearly everyone’s energy bill is lower because of it. And over the last
four years, our emissions of the dangerous carbon pollution that threatens our planet have
actually fallen.
But for the sake of our children and our future, we must do more to combat climate change.
 Now, it’s true that no single event makes a trend. But the fact is the 12 hottest years on
record have all come in the last 15. Heat waves, droughts, wildfires, floods -- all are now
more frequent and more intense. We can choose to believe that Superstorm Sandy, and the
most severe drought in decades, and the worst wildfires some states have ever seen were all
just a freak coincidence. Or we can choose to believe in the overwhelming judgment of
science -- and act before it’s too late.
Now, the good news is we can make meaningful progress on this issue while driving strong
economic growth. I urge this Congress to get together, pursue a bipartisan, market-based
solution to climate change, like the one John McCain and Joe Lieberman worked on together a
few years ago. But if Congress won’t act soon to protect future generations, I will. I will
direct my Cabinet to come up with executive actions we can take, now and in the future, to
reduce pollution, prepare our communities for the consequences of climate change, and speed
the transition to more sustainable sources of energy.
Four years ago, other countries dominated the clean energy market and the jobs that came
with it. And we’ve begun to change that. Last year, wind energy added nearly half of all new
power capacity in America. So let’s generate even more. Solar energy gets cheaper by the
year -- let’s drive down costs even further. As long as countries like China keep going all in on
clean energy, so must we.
Now, in the meantime, the natural gas boom has led to cleaner power and greater energy
independence. We need to encourage that. And that’s why my administration will keep
cutting red tape and speeding up new oil and gas permits. That’s got to be part of an all-ofthe-above
plan. But I also want to work with this Congress to encourage the research and
technology that helps natural gas burn even cleaner and protects our air and our water.In fact, much of our new-found energy is drawn from lands and waters that we, the public,
own together. So tonight, I propose we use some of our oil and gas revenues to fund an
Energy Security Trust that will drive new research and technology to shift our cars and trucks
off oil for good. If a nonpartisan coalition of CEOs and retired generals and admirals can get
behind this idea, then so can we. Let’s take their advice and free our families and businesses
from the painful spikes in gas prices we’ve put up with for far too long.
I’m also issuing a new goal for America: Let’s cut in half the energy wasted by our homes and
businesses over the next 20 years. We'll work with the states to do it. Those states with the
best ideas to create jobs and lower energy bills by constructing more efficient buildings will
receive federal support to help make that happen.
America’s energy sector is just one part of an aging infrastructure badly in need of repair. Ask
any CEO where they’d rather locate and hire -- a country with deteriorating roads and bridges,
or one with high-speed rail and Internet; high-tech schools, self-healing power grids. The
CEO of Siemens America -- a company that brought hundreds of new jobs to North Carolina --
said that if we upgrade our infrastructure, they’ll bring even more jobs. And that’s the
attitude of a lot of companies all around the world. And I know you want these job-creating
projects in your district. I’ve seen all those ribbon-cuttings.
So tonight, I propose a “Fix-It-First” program to put people to work as soon as possible on our
most urgent repairs, like the nearly 70,000 structurally deficient bridges across the country.
And to make sure taxpayers don’t shoulder the whole burden, I’m also proposing a
Partnership to Rebuild America that attracts private capital to upgrade what our businesses
need most: modern ports to move our goods, modern pipelines to withstand a storm, modern
schools worthy of our children. Let’s prove that there’s no better place to do business than
here in the United States of America, and let’s start right away. We can get this done.
And part of our rebuilding effort must also involve our housing sector. The good news is our
housing market is finally healing from the collapse of 2007. Home prices are rising at the
fastest pace in six years. Home purchases are up nearly 50 percent, and construction is
expanding again.
But even with mortgage rates near a 50-year low, too many families with solid credit who
want to buy a home are being rejected. Too many families who never missed a payment and
want to refinance are being told no. That’s holding our entire economy back. We need to fix
it.
Right now, there’s a bill in this Congress that would give every responsible homeowner in
America the chance to save $3,000 a year by refinancing at today’s rates. Democrats and
Republicans have supported it before, so what are we waiting for? Take a vote, and send me
that bill. Why would we be against that? Why would that be a partisan issue, helping folks refinance?
 Right now, overlapping regulations keep responsible young families from buying their first
home. What’s holding us back? Let’s streamline the process, and help our economy grow.
These initiatives in manufacturing, energy, infrastructure, housing -- all these things will help
entrepreneurs and small business owners expand and create new jobs. But none of it will
matter unless we also equip our citizens with the skills and training to fill those jobs.
And that has to start at the earliest possible age. Study after study shows that the sooner a
child begins learning, the better he or she does down the road. But today, fewer than 3 in 10
four year-olds are enrolled in a high-quality preschool program. Most middle-class parents
can’t afford a few hundred bucks a week for a private preschool. And for poor kids who need
help the most, this lack of access to preschool education can shadow them for the rest of their
lives. So tonight, I propose working with states to make high-quality preschool available to
every single child in America. That's something we should be able to do.
Every dollar we invest in high-quality early childhood education can save more than seven
dollars later on -- by boosting graduation rates, reducing teen pregnancy, even reducing
violent crime. In states that make it a priority to educate our youngest children, like Georgia
or Oklahoma, studies show students grow up more likely to read and do math at grade level,
graduate high school, hold a job, form more stable families of their own. We know this works.
 So let’s do what works and make sure none of our children start the race of life already
behind. Let’s give our kids that chance.
Let’s also make sure that a high school diploma puts our kids on a path to a good job. Right
now, countries like Germany focus on graduating their high school students with the
equivalent of a technical degree from one of our community colleges. So those German kids,
they're ready for a job when they graduate high school. They've been trained for the jobs
that are there. Now at schools like P-Tech in Brooklyn, a collaboration between New York
Public Schools and City University of New York and IBM, students will graduate with a high
school diploma and an associate's degree in computers or engineering.
We need to give every American student opportunities like this.
And four years ago, we started Race to the Top -- a competition that convinced almost every
state to develop smarter curricula and higher standards, all for about 1 percent of what we
spend on education each year. Tonight, I’m announcing a new challenge to redesign
America’s high schools so they better equip graduates for the demands of a high-tech
economy. And we’ll reward schools that develop new partnerships with colleges and
employers, and create classes that focus on science, technology, engineering and math -- the
skills today’s employers are looking for to fill the jobs that are there right now and will be
there in the future.Now, even with better high schools, most young people will need some higher education. It’s
a simple fact the more education you’ve got, the more likely you are to have a good job and
work your way into the middle class. But today, skyrocketing costs price too many young
people out of a higher education, or saddle them with unsustainable debt.
Through tax credits, grants and better loans, we’ve made college more affordable for millions
of students and families over the last few years. But taxpayers can’t keep on subsidizing
higher and higher and higher costs for higher education. Colleges must do their part to keep
costs down, and it’s our job to make sure that they do.
So tonight, I ask Congress to change the Higher Education Act so that affordability and value
are included in determining which colleges receive certain types of federal aid. And tomorrow,
my administration will release a new “College Scorecard” that parents and students can use to
compare schools based on a simple criteria -- where you can get the most bang for your
educational buck.
Now, to grow our middle class, our citizens have to have access to the education and training
that today’s jobs require. But we also have to make sure that America remains a place where
everyone who’s willing to work -- everybody who’s willing to work hard has the chance to get
ahead.
Our economy is stronger when we harness the talents and ingenuity of striving, hopeful
immigrants. And right now, leaders from the business, labor, law enforcement, faith
communities -- they all agree that the time has come to pass comprehensive immigration
reform. Now is the time to do it. Now is the time to get it done. Now is the time to get it
done.
Real reform means strong border security, and we can build on the progress my
administration has already made -- putting more boots on the Southern border than at any
time in our history and reducing illegal crossings to their lowest levels in 40 years.
Real reform means establishing a responsible pathway to earned citizenship -- a path that
includes passing a background check, paying taxes and a meaningful penalty, learning
English, and going to the back of the line behind the folks trying to come here legally.
And real reform means fixing the legal immigration system to cut waiting periods and attract
the highly-skilled entrepreneurs and engineers that will help create jobs and grow our
economy.
In other words, we know what needs to be done. And as we speak, bipartisan groups in both
chambers are working diligently to draft a bill, and I applaud their efforts. So let’s get this
done. Send me a comprehensive immigration reform bill in the next few months, and I will
sign it right away. And America will be better for it. Let’s get it done. Let’s get it done.But we can’t stop there. We know our economy is stronger when our wives, our mothers, our
daughters can live their lives free from discrimination in the workplace, and free from the fear
of domestic violence. Today, the Senate passed the Violence Against Women Act that Joe
Biden originally wrote almost 20 years ago. And I now urge the House to do the same. Good
job, Joe. And I ask this Congress to declare that women should earn a living equal to their
efforts, and finally pass the Paycheck Fairness Act this year.
We know our economy is stronger when we reward an honest day’s work with honest wages.
 But today, a full-time worker making the minimum wage earns $14,500 a year. Even with
the tax relief we put in place, a family with two kids that earns the minimum wage still lives
below the poverty line. That’s wrong. That’s why, since the last time this Congress raised the
minimum wage, 19 states have chosen to bump theirs even higher.
Tonight, let’s declare that in the wealthiest nation on Earth, no one who works full-time should
have to live in poverty, and raise the federal minimum wage to $9.00 an hour. We should be
able to get that done.
This single step would raise the incomes of millions of working families. It could mean the
difference between groceries or the food bank; rent or eviction; scraping by or finally getting
ahead. For businesses across the country, it would mean customers with more money in their
pockets. And a whole lot of folks out there would probably need less help from government.
 In fact, working folks shouldn’t have to wait year after year for the minimum wage to go up
while CEO pay has never been higher. So here’s an idea that Governor Romney and I actually
agreed on last year -- let’s tie the minimum wage to the cost of living, so that it finally
becomes a wage you can live on.
Tonight, let’s also recognize that there are communities in this country where no matter how
hard you work, it is virtually impossible to get ahead. Factory towns decimated from years of
plants packing up. Inescapable pockets of poverty, urban and rural, where young adults are
still fighting for their first job. America is not a place where the chance of birth or
circumstance should decide our destiny. And that’s why we need to build new ladders of
opportunity into the middle class for all who are willing to climb them.
Let’s offer incentives to companies that hire Americans who’ve got what it takes to fill that job
opening, but have been out of work so long that no one will give them a chance anymore.
Let’s put people back to work rebuilding vacant homes in run-down neighborhoods. And this
year, my administration will begin to partner with 20 of the hardest-hit towns in America to
get these communities back on their feet. We’ll work with local leaders to target resources at
public safety, and education, and housing.
We’ll give new tax credits to businesses that hire and invest. And we’ll work to strengthen
families by removing the financial deterrents to marriage for low-income couples, and do more
to encourage fatherhood -- because what makes you a man isn’t the ability to conceive a child; it’s having the courage to raise one. And we want to encourage that. We want to help
that.
Stronger families. Stronger communities. A stronger America. It is this kind of prosperity --
broad, shared, built on a thriving middle class -- that has always been the source of our
progress at home. It’s also the foundation of our power and influence throughout the world.
Tonight, we stand united in saluting the troops and civilians who sacrifice every day to protect
us. Because of them, we can say with confidence that America will complete its mission in
Afghanistan and achieve our objective of defeating the core of al Qaeda.
Already, we have brought home 33,000 of our brave servicemen and women. This spring, our
forces will move into a support role, while Afghan security forces take the lead. Tonight, I can
announce that over the next year, another 34,000 American troops will come home from
Afghanistan. This drawdown will continue and by the end of next year, our war in Afghanistan
will be over.
Beyond 2014, America’s commitment to a unified and sovereign Afghanistan will endure, but
the nature of our commitment will change. We're negotiating an agreement with the Afghan
government that focuses on two missions -- training and equipping Afghan forces so that the
country does not again slip into chaos, and counterterrorism efforts that allow us to pursue
the remnants of al Qaeda and their affiliates.
Today, the organization that attacked us on 9/11 is a shadow of its former self. It's true,
different al Qaeda affiliates and extremist groups have emerged -- from the Arabian Peninsula
to Africa. The threat these groups pose is evolving. But to meet this threat, we don’t need to
send tens of thousands of our sons and daughters abroad or occupy other nations. Instead,
we'll need to help countries like Yemen, and Libya, and Somalia provide for their own security,
and help allies who take the fight to terrorists, as we have in Mali. And where necessary,
through a range of capabilities, we will continue to take direct action against those terrorists
who pose the gravest threat to Americans.
Now, as we do, we must enlist our values in the fight. That's why my administration has
worked tirelessly to forge a durable legal and policy framework to guide our counterterrorism
efforts. Throughout, we have kept Congress fully informed of our efforts. I recognize that in
our democracy, no one should just take my word for it that we’re doing things the right way.
 So in the months ahead, I will continue to engage Congress to ensure not only that our
targeting, detention and prosecution of terrorists remains consistent with our laws and system
of checks and balances, but that our efforts are even more transparent to the American
people and to the world.
Of course, our challenges don’t end with al Qaeda. America will continue to lead the effort to
prevent the spread of the world’s most dangerous weapons. The regime in North Korea must
know they will only achieve security and prosperity by meeting their international obligations. Provocations of the sort we saw last night will only further isolate them, as we stand by our
allies, strengthen our own missile defense and lead the world in taking firm action in response
to these threats.
Likewise, the leaders of Iran must recognize that now is the time for a diplomatic solution,
because a coalition stands united in demanding that they meet their obligations, and we will
do what is necessary to prevent them from getting a nuclear weapon.
At the same time, we’ll engage Russia to seek further reductions in our nuclear arsenals, and
continue leading the global effort to secure nuclear materials that could fall into the wrong
hands -- because our ability to influence others depends on our willingness to lead and meet
our obligations.
America must also face the rapidly growing threat from cyber-attacks. Now, we know hackers
steal people’s identities and infiltrate private emails. We know foreign countries and
companies swipe our corporate secrets. Now our enemies are also seeking the ability to
sabotage our power grid, our financial institutions, our air traffic control systems. We cannot
look back years from now and wonder why we did nothing in the face of real threats to our
security and our economy.
And that’s why, earlier today, I signed a new executive order that will strengthen our cyber
defenses by increasing information sharing, and developing standards to protect our national
security, our jobs, and our privacy.
But now Congress must act as well, by passing legislation to give our government a greater
capacity to secure our networks and deter attacks. This is something we should be able to get
done on a bipartisan basis.
Now, even as we protect our people, we should remember that today’s world presents not just
dangers, not just threats, it presents opportunities. To boost American exports, support
American jobs and level the playing field in the growing markets of Asia, we intend to
complete negotiations on a Trans-Pacific Partnership. And tonight, I’m announcing that we
will launch talks on a comprehensive Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership with the
European Union -- because trade that is fair and free across the Atlantic supports millions of
good-paying American jobs.
We also know that progress in the most impoverished parts of our world enriches us all -- not
only because it creates new markets, more stable order in certain regions of the world, but
also because it’s the right thing to do. In many places, people live on little more than a dollar
a day. So the United States will join with our allies to eradicate such extreme poverty in the
next two decades by connecting more people to the global economy; by empowering women;
by giving our young and brightest minds new opportunities to serve, and helping communities
to feed, and power, and educate themselves; by saving the world’s children from preventable
deaths; and by realizing the promise of an AIDS-free generation, which is within our reach.You see, America must remain a beacon to all who seek freedom during this period of historic
change. I saw the power of hope last year in Rangoon, in Burma, when Aung San Suu Kyi
welcomed an American President into the home where she had been imprisoned for years;
when thousands of Burmese lined the streets, waving American flags, including a man who
said, “There is justice and law in the United States. I want our country to be like that.”
In defense of freedom, we’ll remain the anchor of strong alliances from the Americas to Africa;
from Europe to Asia. In the Middle East, we will stand with citizens as they demand their
universal rights, and support stable transitions to democracy.
We know the process will be messy, and we cannot presume to dictate the course of change
in countries like Egypt, but we can -- and will -- insist on respect for the fundamental rights of
all people. We’ll keep the pressure on a Syrian regime that has murdered its own people, and
support opposition leaders that respect the rights of every Syrian. And we will stand steadfast
with Israel in pursuit of security and a lasting peace.
These are the messages I'll deliver when I travel to the Middle East next month. And all this
work depends on the courage and sacrifice of those who serve in dangerous places at great
personal risk –- our diplomats, our intelligence officers, and the men and women of the United
States Armed Forces. As long as I’m Commander-in-Chief, we will do whatever we must to
protect those who serve their country abroad, and we will maintain the best military the world
has ever known.
We'll invest in new capabilities, even as we reduce waste and wartime spending. We will
ensure equal treatment for all servicemembers, and equal benefits for their families -- gay
and straight. We will draw upon the courage and skills of our sisters and daughters and
moms, because women have proven under fire that they are ready for combat.
We will keep faith with our veterans, investing in world-class care, including mental health
care, for our wounded warriors -- supporting our military families; giving our veterans the
benefits and education and job opportunities that they have earned. And I want to thank my
wife, Michelle, and Dr. Jill Biden for their continued dedication to serving our military families
as well as they have served us. Thank you, honey. Thank you, Jill.
Defending our freedom, though, is not just the job of our military alone. We must all do our
part to make sure our God-given rights are protected here at home. That includes one of the
most fundamental right of a democracy: the right to vote. When any American, no matter
where they live or what their party, are denied that right because they can’t afford to wait for
five or six or seven hours just to cast their ballot, we are betraying our ideals.
So tonight, I’m announcing a nonpartisan commission to improve the voting experience in
America. And it definitely needs improvement. I’m asking two long-time experts in the field -- who, by
the way, recently served as the top attorneys for my campaign and for Governor Romney’s
campaign -- to lead it. We can fix this, and we will. The American people demand it, and so
does our democracy.
Of course, what I’ve said tonight matters little if we don’t come together to protect our most
precious resource: our children. It has been two months since Newtown. I know this is not
the first time this country has debated how to reduce gun violence. But this time is different.
 Overwhelming majorities of Americans -- Americans who believe in the Second Amendment -
- have come together around common-sense reform, like background checks that will make it
harder for criminals to get their hands on a gun. Senators of both parties are working
together on tough new laws to prevent anyone from buying guns for resale to criminals.
 Police chiefs are asking our help to get weapons of war and massive ammunition magazines
off our streets, because these police chiefs, they’re tired of seeing their guys and gals being
outgunned.
Each of these proposals deserves a vote in Congress. Now, if you want to vote no, that’s your
choice. But these proposals deserve a vote. Because in the two months since Newtown, more
than a thousand birthdays, graduations, anniversaries have been stolen from our lives by a
bullet from a gun -- more than a thousand.
One of those we lost was a young girl named Hadiya Pendleton. She was 15 years old. She
loved Fig Newtons and lip gloss. She was a majorette. She was so good to her friends they
all thought they were her best friend. Just three weeks ago, she was here, in Washington,
with her classmates, performing for her country at my inauguration. And a week later, she
was shot and killed in a Chicago park after school, just a mile away from my house.
Hadiya’s parents, Nate and Cleo, are in this chamber tonight, along with more than two dozen
Americans whose lives have been torn apart by gun violence. They deserve a vote. They
deserve a vote. Gabby Giffords deserves a vote. The families of Newtown deserve a vote.
 The families of Aurora deserve a vote. The families of Oak Creek and Tucson and Blacksburg,
and the countless other communities ripped open by gun violence –- they deserve a simple
vote. They deserve a simple vote.
Our actions will not prevent every senseless act of violence in this country. In fact, no laws,
no initiatives, no administrative acts will perfectly solve all the challenges I’ve outlined
tonight. But we were never sent here to be perfect. We were sent here to make what
difference we can, to secure this nation, expand opportunity, uphold our ideals through the
hard, often frustrating, but absolutely necessary work of self-government.
We were sent here to look out for our fellow Americans the same way they look out for one
another, every single day, usually without fanfare, all across this country. We should follow
their example.We should follow the example of a New York City nurse named Menchu Sanchez. When
Hurricane Sandy plunged her hospital into darkness, she wasn’t thinking about how her own
home was faring. Her mind was on the 20 precious newborns in her care and the rescue plan
she devised that kept them all safe.
We should follow the example of a North Miami woman named Desiline Victor. When Desiline
arrived at her polling place, she was told the wait to vote might be six hours. And as time
ticked by, her concern was not with her tired body or aching feet, but whether folks like her
would get to have their say. And hour after hour, a throng of people stayed in line to support
her -- because Desiline is 102 years old. And they erupted in cheers when she finally put on a
sticker that read, “I voted.”
We should follow the example of a police officer named Brian Murphy. When a gunman
opened fire on a Sikh temple in Wisconsin and Brian was the first to arrive, he did not
consider his own safety. He fought back until help arrived and ordered his fellow officers to
protect the safety of the Americans worshiping inside, even as he lay bleeding from 12 bullet
wounds. And when asked how he did that, Brian said, “That’s just the way we’re made.”
That’s just the way we’re made. We may do different jobs and wear different uniforms, and
hold different views than the person beside us. But as Americans, we all share the same
proud title -- we are citizens. It’s a word that doesn’t just describe our nationality or legal
status. It describes the way we’re made. It describes what we believe. It captures the
enduring idea that this country only works when we accept certain obligations to one another
and to future generations, that our rights are wrapped up in the rights of others; and that well
into our third century as a nation, it remains the task of us all, as citizens of these United
States, to be the authors of the next great chapter of our American story.
Thank you. God bless you, and God bless these United States of America.