Hello, Morehouse! Thank you, everybody. Please be seated. I love you back. That is why I am here. I have to say that it is one of the great honors of my life to be able to address this gathering
here today. I want to thank Dr. Wilson for his outstanding leadership, and the Board of
Trustees. We have Congressman Cedric Richmond and Sanford Bishop -- both proud alumni
of this school, as well as Congressman Hank Johnson. And one of my dear friends and a great
inspiration to us all -- the great John Lewis is here. We have your outstanding Mayor, Mr.
Kasim Reed, in the house.
To all the members of the Morehouse family. And most of all, congratulations to this
distinguished group of Morehouse Men -- the Class of 2013.
I have to say that it’s a little hard to follow -- not Dr. Wilson, but a skinny guy with a funny
name. Betsegaw Tadele -- he’s going to be doing something.
I also have to say that you all are going to get wet. And I'd be out there with you if I could.
But Secret Service gets nervous. So I'm going to have to stay here, dry. But know that I'm
there with you in spirit.Some of you are graduating summa cum laude. Some of you are graduating magna cum
laude. I know some of you are just graduating, “thank you, Lordy.” That's appropriate
because it’s a Sunday.
I see some moms and grandmas here, aunts, in their Sunday best -- although they are upset
about their hair getting messed up. Michelle would not be sitting in the rain. She has taught
me about hair.
I want to congratulate all of you -- the parents, the grandparents, the brothers and sisters,
the family and friends who supported these young men in so many ways. This is your day, as
well. Just think about it -- your sons, your brothers, your nephews -- they spent the last four
years far from home and close to Spelman, and yet they are still here today. So you’ve done
something right. Graduates, give a big round of applause to your family for everything that
they’ve done for you.
I know that some of you had to wait in long lines to get into today’s ceremony. And I would
apologize, but it did not have anything to do with security. Those graduates just wanted you
to know what it’s like to register for classes here. And this time of year brings a different kind
of stress -- every senior stopping by Gloster Hall over the past week making sure your name
was actually on the list of students who met all the graduation requirements. If it wasn't on
the list, you had to figure out why. Was it that library book you lent to that trifling roommate
who didn’t return it? Was it Dr. Johnson’s policy class? Did you get enough Crown Forum
credits?
On that last point, I’m going to exercise my power as President to declare this speech
sufficient Crown Forum credits for any otherwise eligible student to graduate. That is my
graduation gift to you. You have a special dispensation.Now, graduates, I am humbled to stand here with all of you as an honorary Morehouse Man.
I finally made it. And as I do, I’m mindful of an old saying: “You can always tell a Morehouse
Man -- but you can’t tell him much.” And that makes my task a little more difficult, I
suppose. But I think it also reflects the sense of pride that’s always been part of this school’s
tradition.
Benjamin Mays, who served as the president of Morehouse for almost 30 years, understood
that tradition better than anybody. He said -- and I quote -- “It will not be sufficient for
Morehouse College, for any college, for that matter, to produce clever graduates… but rather
honest men, men who can be trusted in public and private life -- men who are sensitive to the
wrongs, the sufferings, and the injustices of society and who are willing to accept
responsibility for correcting [those] ills.”It was that mission -- not just to educate men, but to cultivate good men, strong men, upright
men -- that brought community leaders together just two years after the end of the Civil
War. They assembled a list of 37 men, free blacks and freed slaves, who would make up the
first prospective class of what later became Morehouse College. Most of those first students
had a desire to become teachers and preachers -- to better themselves so they could help
others do the same.
A century and a half later, times have changed. But the “Morehouse Mystique” still endures.
Some of you probably came here from communities where everybody looked like you. Others
may have come here in search of a community. And I suspect that some of you probably felt
a little bit of culture shock the first time you came together as a class in King’s Chapel. All of
a sudden, you weren’t the only high school sports captain, you weren’t the only student
council president. You were suddenly in a group of high achievers, and that meant you were
expected to do something more.
That’s the unique sense of purpose that this place has always infused -- the conviction that
this is a training ground not only for individual success, but for leadership that can change the
world.
Dr. King was just 15 years old when he enrolled here at Morehouse. He was an unknown,
undersized, unassuming young freshman who lived at home with his parents. And I think it’s
fair to say he wasn’t the coolest kid on campus -- for the suits he wore, his classmates called
him “Tweed.” But his education at Morehouse helped to forge the intellect, the discipline, the
compassion, the soul force that would transform America. It was here that he was introduced
to the writings of Gandhi and Thoreau, and the theory of civil disobedience. It was here that
professors encouraged him to look past the world as it was and fight for the world as it should
be. And it was here, at Morehouse, as Dr. King later wrote, where “I realized that
nobody…was afraid.” Not even of some bad weather. I added on that part. I know it’s wet out there. But Dr.
Wilson told me you all had a choice and decided to do it out here anyway. That's a Morehouse
Man talking.
Now, think about it. For black men in the ‘40s and the ‘50s, the threat of violence, the
constant humiliations, large and small, the uncertainty that you could support a family, the
gnawing doubts born of the Jim Crow culture that told you every day that somehow you were
inferior, the temptation to shrink from the world, to accept your place, to avoid risks, to be
afraid -- that temptation was necessarily strong.
And yet, here, under the tutelage of men like Dr. Mays, young Martin learned to be unafraid.
And he, in turn, taught others to be unafraid. And over time, he taught a nation to be
unafraid. And over the last 50 years, thanks to the moral force of Dr. King and a Moses generation that
overcame their fear and their cynicism and their despair, barriers have come tumbling down,
and new doors of opportunity have swung open, and laws and hearts and minds have been
changed to the point where someone who looks just like you can somehow come to serve as
President of these United States of America.
So the history we share should give you hope. The future we share should give you hope.
You’re graduating into an improving job market. You’re living in a time when advances in
technology and communication put the world at your fingertips. Your generation is uniquely
poised for success unlike any generation of African Americans that came before it.
But that doesn’t mean we don’t have work -- because if we’re honest with ourselves, we know
that too few of our brothers have the opportunities that you’ve had here at Morehouse. In
troubled neighborhoods all across this country -- many of them heavily African American --
too few of our citizens have role models to guide them. Communities just a couple miles from
my house in Chicago, communities just a couple miles from here -- they’re places where jobs
are still too scarce and wages are still too low; where schools are underfunded and violence is
pervasive; where too many of our men spend their youth not behind a desk in a classroom,
but hanging out on the streets or brooding behind a jail cell.
My job, as President, is to advocate for policies that generate more opportunity for everybody
-- policies that strengthen the middle class and give more people the chance to climb their
way into the middle class. Policies that create more good jobs and reduce poverty, and
educate more children, and give more families the security of health care, and protect more of
our children from the horrors of gun violence. That's my job. Those are matters of public
policy, and it is important for all of us -- black, white and brown -- to advocate for an America
where everybody has got a fair shot in life. Not just some. Not just a few.
But along with collective responsibilities, we have individual responsibilities. There are some
things, as black men, we can only do for ourselves. There are some things, as Morehouse
Men, that you are obliged to do for those still left behind. As Morehouse Men, you now wield
something even more powerful than the diploma you’re about to collect -- and that’s the
power of your example.So what I ask of you today is the same thing I ask of every graduating class I address: Use
that power for something larger than yourself. Live up to President Mays’s challenge. Be
“sensitive to the wrongs, the sufferings, and the injustices of society.” And be “willing to
accept responsibility for correcting [those] ills.”
I know that some of you came to Morehouse from communities where life was about keeping
your head down and looking out for yourself. Maybe you feel like you escaped, and now you
can take your degree and get that fancy job and the nice house and the nice car -- and never
look back. And don’t get me wrong -- with all those student loans you’ve had to take out, I
know you’ve got to earn some money. With doors open to you that your parents and grandparents could not even imagine, no one
expects you to take a vow of poverty. But I will say it betrays a poverty of ambition if all you
think about is what goods you can buy instead of what good you can do.
So, yes, go get that law degree. But if you do, ask yourself if the only option is to defend the
rich and the powerful, or if you can also find some time to defend the powerless. Sure, go get
your MBA, or start that business. We need black businesses out there. But ask yourselves
what broader purpose your business might serve, in putting people to work, or transforming a
neighborhood. The most successful CEOs I know didn’t start out intent just on making money
-- rather, they had a vision of how their product or service would change things, and the
money followed.
Some of you may be headed to medical school to become doctors. But make sure you heal
folks in underserved communities who really need it, too. For generations, certain groups in
this country -- especially African Americans -- have been desperate in need of access to
quality, affordable health care. And as a society, we’re finally beginning to change that.
Those of you who are under the age of 26 already have the option to stay on your parent’s
health care plan. But all of you are heading into an economy where many young people
expect not only to have multiple jobs, but multiple careers.
So starting October 1st, because of the Affordable Care Act -- otherwise known as Obamacare
-- you’ll be able to shop for a quality, affordable plan that’s yours and travels with you -- a
plan that will insure not only your health, but your dreams if you are sick or get in an
accident. But we're going to need some doctors to make sure it works, too. We've got to
make sure everybody has good health in this country. It’s not just good for you, it’s good for
this country. So you're going to have to spread the word to your fellow young people.
Which brings me to a second point: Just as Morehouse has taught you to expect more of
yourselves, inspire those who look up to you to expect more of themselves. We know that too
many young men in our community continue to make bad choices. And I have to say,
growing up, I made quite a few myself. Sometimes I wrote off my own failings as just
another example of the world trying to keep a black man down. I had a tendency sometimes
to make excuses for me not doing the right thing. But one of the things that all of you have
learned over the last four years is there’s no longer any room for excuses.I understand there’s a common fraternity creed here at Morehouse: “Excuses are tools of the
incompetent used to build bridges to nowhere and monuments of nothingness.” Well, we’ve
got no time for excuses. Not because the bitter legacy of slavery and segregation have
vanished entirely; they have not. Not because racism and discrimination no longer exist; we
know those are still out there. It’s just that in today’s hyper-connected, hypercompetitive
world, with millions of young people from China and India and Brazil -- many of whom started
with a whole lot less than all of you did -- all of them entering the global workforce alongside
you, nobody is going to give you anything that you have not earned. Nobody cares how tough your upbringing was. Nobody cares if you suffered some
discrimination. And moreover, you have to remember that whatever you’ve gone through, it
pales in comparison to the hardships previous generations endured -- and they overcame
them. And if they overcame them, you can overcome them, too.
You now hail from a lineage and legacy of immeasurably strong men -- men who bore
tremendous burdens and still laid the stones for the path on which we now walk. You wear
the mantle of Frederick Douglass and Booker T. Washington, and Ralph Bunche and Langston
Hughes, and George Washington Carver and Ralph Abernathy and Thurgood Marshall, and,
yes, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. These men were many things to many people. And they
knew full well the role that racism played in their lives. But when it came to their own
accomplishments and sense of purpose, they had no time for excuses.
Every one of you have a grandma or an uncle or a parent who’s told you that at some point in
life, as an African American, you have to work twice as hard as anyone else if you want to get
by. I think President Mays put it even better: He said, “Whatever you do, strive to do it so
well that no man living and no man dead, and no man yet to be born can do it any better.”
And I promise you, what was needed in Dr. Mays’s time, that spirit of excellence, and hard
work, and dedication, and no excuses is needed now more than ever. If you think you can
just get over in this economy just because you have a Morehouse degree, you’re in for a rude
awakening. But if you stay hungry, if you keep hustling, if you keep on your grind and get
other folks to do the same -- nobody can stop you.
And when I talk about pursuing excellence and setting an example, I’m not just talking about
in your professional life. One of today’s graduates, Frederick Anderson -- where’s Frederick?
Frederick, right here. I know it’s raining, but I'm going to tell about Frederick. Frederick
started his college career in Ohio, only to find out that his high school sweetheart back in
Georgia was pregnant. So he came back and enrolled in Morehouse to be closer to her.
Pretty soon, helping raise a newborn and working night shifts became too much, so he started
taking business classes at a technical college instead -- doing everything from delivering
newspapers to buffing hospital floors to support his family.I was raised by a heroic single mom, wonderful grandparents -- made incredible sacrifices for
me. And I know there are moms and grandparents here today who did the same thing for all
of you. But I sure wish I had had a father who was not only present, but involved. Didn’t
know my dad. And so my whole life, I’ve tried to be for Michelle and my girls what my father
was not for my mother and me. I want to break that cycle where a father is not at home --
where a father is not helping to raise that son or daughter. I want to be a better father, a
better husband, a better man.
It’s hard work that demands your constant attention and frequent sacrifice. And I promise
you, Michelle will tell you I’m not perfect. She’s got a long list of my imperfections. Even
now, I’m still practicing, I'm still learning, still getting corrected in terms of how to be a fine
husband and a good father. But I will tell you this: Everything else is unfulfilled if we fail at
family, if we fail at that responsibility.
I know that when I am on my deathbed someday, I will not be thinking about any particular
legislation I passed; I will not be thinking about a policy I promoted; I will not be thinking
about the speech I gave, I will not be thinking the Nobel Prize I received. I will be thinking
about that walk I took with my daughters. I'll be thinking about a lazy afternoon with my
wife. I'll be thinking about sitting around the dinner table and seeing them happy and healthy
and knowing that they were loved. And I'll be thinking about whether I did right by all of
them.
So be a good role model, set a good example for that young brother coming up. If you know
somebody who’s not on point, go back and bring that brother along -- those who’ve been left
behind, who haven’t had the same opportunities we have -- they need to hear from you.
You’ve got to be engaged on the barbershops, on the basketball court, at church, spend time
and energy and presence to give people opportunities and a chance. Pull them up, expose
them, support their dreams. Don't put them down.We’ve got to teach them just like what we have to learn, what it means to be a man -- to
serve your city like Maynard Jackson; to shape the culture like Spike Lee; to be like Chester
Davenport, one of the first people to integrate the University of Georgia Law School. When he
got there, nobody would sit next to him in class. But Chester didn’t mind. Later on, he said,
“It was the thing for me to do. Someone needed to be the first.” And today, Chester is here
celebrating his 50th reunion. Where is Chester Davenport? He’s here.
So if you’ve had role models, fathers, brothers like that -- thank them today. And if you
haven’t, commit yourself to being that man to somebody else.
And finally, as you do these things, do them not just for yourself, but don't even do them just
for the African American community. I want you to set your sights higher. At the turn of the
last century, W.E.B. DuBois spoke about the “talented tenth” -- a class of highly educated,
socially conscious leaders in the black community. But it’s not just the African American
community that needs you. The country needs you. The world needs you.As Morehouse Men, many of you know what it’s like to be an outsider; know what it’s like to
be marginalized; know what it’s like to feel the sting of discrimination. And that’s an
experience that a lot of Americans share. Hispanic Americans know that feeling when
somebody asks them where they come from or tell them to go back. Gay and lesbian
Americans feel it when a stranger passes judgment on their parenting skills or the love that
they share. Muslim Americans feel it when they’re stared at with suspicion because of their
faith. Any woman who knows the injustice of earning less pay for doing the same work -- she
knows what it’s like to be on the outside looking in.
So your experiences give you special insight that today’s leaders need. If you tap into that
experience, it should endow you with empathy -- the understanding of what it’s like to walk in
somebody else’s shoes, to see through their eyes, to know what it’s like when you're not born
on 3rd base, thinking you hit a triple. It should give you the ability to connect. It should give
you a sense of compassion and what it means to overcome barriers.
And I will tell you, Class of 2013, whatever success I have achieved, whatever positions of
leadership I have held have depended less on Ivy League degrees or SAT scores or GPAs, and
have instead been due to that sense of connection and empathy -- the special obligation I felt,
as a black man like you, to help those who need it most, people who didn’t have the
opportunities that I had -- because there but for the grace of God, go I -- I might have been
in their shoes. I might have been in prison. I might have been unemployed. I might not
have been able to support a family. And that motivates me.
So it’s up to you to widen your circle of concern -- to care about justice for everybody, white,
black and brown. Everybody. Not just in your own community, but also across this country
and around the world. To make sure everyone has a voice, and everybody gets a seat at the
table; that everybody, no matter what you look like or where you come from, what your last
name is -- it doesn’t matter, everybody gets a chance to walk through those doors of
opportunity if they are willing to work hard enough. When Leland Shelton was four years old -- where’s Leland? Stand up, Leland. When Leland
Shelton was four years old, social services took him away from his mama, put him in the care
of his grandparents. By age 14, he was in the foster care system. Three years after that,
Leland enrolled in Morehouse. And today he is graduating Phi Beta Kappa on his way to
Harvard Law School. But he’s not stopping there. As a member of the National Foster Care
Youth and Alumni Policy Council, he plans to use his law degree to make sure kids like him
don’t fall through the cracks. And it won’t matter whether they’re black kids or brown kids or
white kids or Native American kids, because he’ll understand what they’re going through. And
he'll be fighting for them. He'll be in their corner. That's leadership. That's a Morehouse Man
right there.That’s what we’ve come to expect from you, Morehouse -- a legacy of leaders -- not just in
our black community, but for the entire American community. To recognize the burdens you
carry with you, but to resist the temptation to use them as excuses. To transform the way we
think about manhood, and set higher standards for ourselves and for others. To be
successful, but also to understand that each of us has responsibilities not just to ourselves,
but to one another and to future generations. Men who refuse to be afraid. Men who refuse
to be afraid.
Members of the Class of 2013, you are heirs to a great legacy. You have within you that
same courage and that same strength, the same resolve as the men who came before you.
That’s what being a Morehouse Man is all about. That’s what being an American is all about.
Success may not come quickly or easily. But if you strive to do what’s right, if you work
harder and dream bigger, if you set an example in your own lives and do your part to help
meet the challenges of our time, then I’m confident that, together, we will continue the neverending
task of perfecting our union.
Congratulations, Class of 2013. God bless you. God bless Morehouse.
And God bless the United States of America.
It is a great honor to return to the National Defense University. Here, at Fort McNair,
Americans have served in uniform since 1791 -- standing guard in the earliest days of the
Republic, and contemplating the future of warfare here in the 21st century.
For over two centuries, the United States has been bound together by founding documents
that defined who we are as Americans, and served as our compass through every type of
change. Matters of war and peace are no different. Americans are deeply ambivalent about
war, but having fought for our independence, we know a price must be paid for freedom.
From the Civil War to our struggle against fascism, on through the long twilight struggle of the
Cold War, battlefields have changed and technology has evolved. But our commitment to
constitutional principles has weathered every war, and every war has come to an end.
With the collapse of the Berlin Wall, a new dawn of democracy took hold abroad, and a decade
of peace and prosperity arrived here at home. And for a moment, it seemed the 21st century
would be a tranquil time. And then, on September 11, 2001, we were shaken out of
complacency. Thousands were taken from us, as clouds of fire and metal and ash descended
upon a sun-filled morning. This was a different kind of war. No armies came to our shores,
and our military was not the principal target. Instead, a group of terrorists came to kill as
many civilians as they could.And so our nation went to war. We have now been at war for well over a decade. I won’t
review the full history. What is clear is that we quickly drove al Qaeda out of Afghanistan, but
then shifted our focus and began a new war in Iraq. And this carried significant consequences
for our fight against al Qaeda, our standing in the world, and -- to this day -- our interests in
a vital region.
Meanwhile, we strengthened our defenses -- hardening targets, tightening transportation
security, giving law enforcement new tools to prevent terror. Most of these changes were
sound. Some caused inconvenience. But some, like expanded surveillance, raised difficult
questions about the balance that we strike between our interests in security and our values of
privacy. And in some cases, I believe we compromised our basic values -- by using torture to
interrogate our enemies, and detaining individuals in a way that ran counter to the rule of law.
So after I took office, we stepped up the war against al Qaeda but we also sought to change
its course. We relentlessly targeted al Qaeda’s leadership. We ended the war in Iraq, and
brought nearly 150,000 troops home. We pursued a new strategy in Afghanistan, and
increased our training of Afghan forces. We unequivocally banned torture, affirmed our
commitment to civilian courts, worked to align our policies with the rule of law, and expanded
our consultations with Congress.
Today, Osama bin Laden is dead, and so are most of his top lieutenants. There have been no
large-scale attacks on the United States, and our homeland is more secure. Fewer of our
troops are in harm’s way, and over the next 19 months they will continue to come home. Our
alliances are strong, and so is our standing in the world. In sum, we are safer because of our
efforts.Now, make no mistake, our nation is still threatened by terrorists. From Benghazi to Boston,
we have been tragically reminded of that truth. But we have to recognize that the threat has
shifted and evolved from the one that came to our shores on 9/11. With a decade of
experience now to draw from, this is the moment to ask ourselves hard questions -- about the
nature of today’s threats and how we should confront them.
And these questions matter to every American.
For over the last decade, our nation has spent well over a trillion dollars on war, helping to
explode our deficits and constraining our ability to nation-build here at home. Our
servicemembers and their families have sacrificed far more on our behalf. Nearly 7,000
Americans have made the ultimate sacrifice. Many more have left a part of themselves on the
battlefield, or brought the shadows of battle back home. From our use of drones to the
detention of terrorist suspects, the decisions that we are making now will define the type of
nation -- and world -- that we leave to our children. So America is at a crossroads. We must define the nature and scope of this struggle, or else
it will define us. We have to be mindful of James Madison’s warning that “No nation could
preserve its freedom in the midst of continual warfare.” Neither I, nor any President, can
promise the total defeat of terror. We will never erase the evil that lies in the hearts of some
human beings, nor stamp out every danger to our open society. But what we can do -- what
we must do -- is dismantle networks that pose a direct danger to us, and make it less likely
for new groups to gain a foothold, all the while maintaining the freedoms and ideals that we
defend. And to define that strategy, we have to make decisions based not on fear, but on
hard-earned wisdom. That begins with understanding the current threat that we face.
Today, the core of al Qaeda in Afghanistan and Pakistan is on the path to defeat. Their
remaining operatives spend more time thinking about their own safety than plotting against
us. They did not direct the attacks in Benghazi or Boston. They’ve not carried out a
successful attack on our homeland since 9/11.
Instead, what we’ve seen is the emergence of various al Qaeda affiliates. From Yemen to
Iraq, from Somalia to North Africa, the threat today is more diffuse, with Al Qaeda’s affiliates
in the Arabian Peninsula -- AQAP -- the most active in plotting against our homeland. And
while none of AQAP’s efforts approach the scale of 9/11, they have continued to plot acts of
terror, like the attempt to blow up an airplane on Christmas Day in 2009.
Unrest in the Arab world has also allowed extremists to gain a foothold in countries like Libya
and Syria. But here, too, there are differences from 9/11. In some cases, we continue to
confront state-sponsored networks like Hezbollah that engage in acts of terror to achieve
political goals. Other of these groups are simply collections of local militias or extremists
interested in seizing territory. And while we are vigilant for signs that these groups may pose
a transnational threat, most are focused on operating in the countries and regions where they
are based. And that means we'll face more localized threats like what we saw in Benghazi, or
the BP oil facility in Algeria, in which local operatives -- perhaps in loose affiliation with
regional networks -- launch periodic attacks against Western diplomats, companies, and other
soft targets, or resort to kidnapping and other criminal enterprises to fund their operations.And finally, we face a real threat from radicalized individuals here in the United States.
Whether it’s a shooter at a Sikh Temple in Wisconsin, a plane flying into a building in Texas,
or the extremists who killed 168 people at the Federal Building in Oklahoma City, America has
confronted many forms of violent extremism in our history. Deranged or alienated individuals
-- often U.S. citizens or legal residents -- can do enormous damage, particularly when inspired
by larger notions of violent jihad. And that pull towards extremism appears to have led to the
shooting at Fort Hood and the bombing of the Boston Marathon.
So that’s the current threat -- lethal yet less capable al Qaeda affiliates; threats to diplomatic
facilities and businesses abroad; homegrown extremists. This is the future of terrorism. We have to take these threats seriously, and do all that we can to confront them. But as we
shape our response, we have to recognize that the scale of this threat closely resembles the
types of attacks we faced before 9/11.
In the 1980s, we lost Americans to terrorism at our Embassy in Beirut; at our Marine Barracks
in Lebanon; on a cruise ship at sea; at a disco in Berlin; and on a Pan Am flight -- Flight 103
-- over Lockerbie. In the 1990s, we lost Americans to terrorism at the World Trade Center; at
our military facilities in Saudi Arabia; and at our Embassy in Kenya. These attacks were all
brutal; they were all deadly; and we learned that left unchecked, these threats can grow. But
if dealt with smartly and proportionally, these threats need not rise to the level that we saw
on the eve of 9/11.
Moreover, we have to recognize that these threats don’t arise in a vacuum. Most, though not
all, of the terrorism we faced is fueled by a common ideology -- a belief by some extremists
that Islam is in conflict with the United States and the West, and that violence against
Western targets, including civilians, is justified in pursuit of a larger cause. Of course, this
ideology is based on a lie, for the United States is not at war with Islam. And this ideology is
rejected by the vast majority of Muslims, who are the most frequent victims of terrorist
attacks.Nevertheless, this ideology persists, and in an age when ideas and images can travel the
globe in an instant, our response to terrorism can’t depend on military or law enforcement
alone. We need all elements of national power to win a battle of wills, a battle of ideas. So
what I want to discuss here today is the components of such a comprehensive
counterterrorism strategy.
First, we must finish the work of defeating al Qaeda and its associated forces.
In Afghanistan, we will complete our transition to Afghan responsibility for that country’s
security. Our troops will come home. Our combat mission will come to an end. And we will
work with the Afghan government to train security forces, and sustain a counterterrorism
force, which ensures that al Qaeda can never again establish a safe haven to launch attacks
against us or our allies.
Beyond Afghanistan, we must define our effort not as a boundless “global war on terror,” but
rather as a series of persistent, targeted efforts to dismantle specific networks of violent
extremists that threaten America. In many cases, this will involve partnerships with other
countries. Already, thousands of Pakistani soldiers have lost their lives fighting extremists. In
Yemen, we are supporting security forces that have reclaimed territory from AQAP. In
Somalia, we helped a coalition of African nations push al-Shabaab out of its strongholds. In
Mali, we’re providing military aid to French-led intervention to push back al Qaeda in the
Maghreb, and help the people of Mali reclaim their future.Much of our best counterterrorism cooperation results in the gathering and sharing of
intelligence, the arrest and prosecution of terrorists. And that’s how a Somali terrorist
apprehended off the coast of Yemen is now in a prison in New York. That’s how we worked
with European allies to disrupt plots from Denmark to Germany to the United Kingdom. That’s
how intelligence collected with Saudi Arabia helped us stop a cargo plane from being blown up
over the Atlantic. These partnerships work.
But despite our strong preference for the detention and prosecution of terrorists, sometimes
this approach is foreclosed. Al Qaeda and its affiliates try to gain foothold in some of the most
distant and unforgiving places on Earth. They take refuge in remote tribal regions. They hide
in caves and walled compounds. They train in empty deserts and rugged mountains.
In some of these places -- such as parts of Somalia and Yemen -- the state only has the most
tenuous reach into the territory. In other cases, the state lacks the capacity or will to take
action. And it’s also not possible for America to simply deploy a team of Special Forces to
capture every terrorist. Even when such an approach may be possible, there are places where
it would pose profound risks to our troops and local civilians -- where a terrorist compound
cannot be breached without triggering a firefight with surrounding tribal communities, for
example, that pose no threat to us; times when putting U.S. boots on the ground may trigger
a major international crisis.
To put it another way, our operation in Pakistan against Osama bin Laden cannot be the
norm. The risks in that case were immense. The likelihood of capture, although that was our
preference, was remote given the certainty that our folks would confront resistance. The fact
that we did not find ourselves confronted with civilian casualties, or embroiled in an extended
firefight, was a testament to the meticulous planning and professionalism of our Special
Forces, but it also depended on some luck. And it was supported by massive infrastructure in
Afghanistan. And even then, the cost to our relationship with Pakistan -- and the backlash among the
Pakistani public over encroachment on their territory -- was so severe that we are just now
beginning to rebuild this important partnership.
So it is in this context that the United States has taken lethal, targeted action against al
Qaeda and its associated forces, including with remotely piloted aircraft commonly referred to
as drones.
As was true in previous armed conflicts, this new technology raises profound questions --
about who is targeted, and why; about civilian casualties, and the risk of creating new
enemies; about the legality of such strikes under U.S. and international law; about
accountability and morality. So let me address these questions.To begin with, our actions are effective. Don’t take my word for it. In the intelligence
gathered at bin Laden’s compound, we found that he wrote, “We could lose the reserves to
enemy’s air strikes. We cannot fight air strikes with explosives.” Other communications from
al Qaeda operatives confirm this as well. Dozens of highly skilled al Qaeda commanders,
trainers, bomb makers and operatives have been taken off the battlefield. Plots have been
disrupted that would have targeted international aviation, U.S. transit systems, European
cities and our troops in Afghanistan. Simply put, these strikes have saved lives.
Moreover, America’s actions are legal. We were attacked on 9/11. Within a week, Congress
overwhelmingly authorized the use of force. Under domestic law, and international law, the
United States is at war with al Qaeda, the Taliban, and their associated forces. We are at war
with an organization that right now would kill as many Americans as they could if we did not
stop them first. So this is a just war -- a war waged proportionally, in last resort, and in selfdefense.
And yet, as our fight enters a new phase, America’s legitimate claim of self-defense cannot be
the end of the discussion. To say a military tactic is legal, or even effective, is not to say it is
wise or moral in every instance. For the same human progress that gives us the technology
to strike half a world away also demands the discipline to constrain that power -- or risk
abusing it. And that’s why, over the last four years, my administration has worked vigorously
to establish a framework that governs our use of force against terrorists –- insisting upon
clear guidelines, oversight and accountability that is now codified in Presidential Policy
Guidance that I signed yesterday.In the Afghan war theater, we must -- and will -- continue to support our troops until the
transition is complete at the end of 2014. And that means we will continue to take strikes
against high value al Qaeda targets, but also against forces that are massing to support
attacks on coalition forces. But by the end of 2014, we will no longer have the same need for
force protection, and the progress we’ve made against core al Qaeda will reduce the need for
unmanned strikes.
Beyond the Afghan theater, we only target al Qaeda and its associated forces. And even then,
the use of drones is heavily constrained. America does not take strikes when we have the
ability to capture individual terrorists; our preference is always to detain, interrogate, and
prosecute. America cannot take strikes wherever we choose; our actions are bound by
consultations with partners, and respect for state sovereignty.
America does not take strikes to punish individuals; we act against terrorists who pose a
continuing and imminent threat to the American people, and when there are no other
governments capable of effectively addressing the threat. And before any strike is taken,
there must be near-certainty that no civilians will be killed or injured -- the highest standard
we can set.Now, this last point is critical, because much of the criticism about drone strikes -- both here
at home and abroad -- understandably centers on reports of civilian casualties. There’s a
wide gap between U.S. assessments of such casualties and nongovernmental reports.
Nevertheless, it is a hard fact that U.S. strikes have resulted in civilian casualties, a risk that
exists in every war. And for the families of those civilians, no words or legal construct can
justify their loss. For me, and those in my chain of command, those deaths will haunt us as
long as we live, just as we are haunted by the civilian casualties that have occurred
throughout conventional fighting in Afghanistan and Iraq.
But as Commander-in-Chief, I must weigh these heartbreaking tragedies against the
alternatives. To do nothing in the face of terrorist networks would invite far more civilian
casualties -- not just in our cities at home and our facilities abroad, but also in the very places
like Sana’a and Kabul and Mogadishu where terrorists seek a foothold. Remember that the
terrorists we are after target civilians, and the death toll from their acts of terrorism against
Muslims dwarfs any estimate of civilian casualties from drone strikes. So doing nothing is not
an option.
Where foreign governments cannot or will not effectively stop terrorism in their territory, the
primary alternative to targeted lethal action would be the use of conventional military
options. As I’ve already said, even small special operations carry enormous risks.
Conventional airpower or missiles are far less precise than drones, and are likely to cause
more civilian casualties and more local outrage. And invasions of these territories lead us to
be viewed as occupying armies, unleash a torrent of unintended consequences, are difficult to
contain, result in large numbers of civilian casualties and ultimately empower those who thrive
on violent conflict.So it is false to assert that putting boots on the ground is less likely to result in civilian deaths
or less likely to create enemies in the Muslim world. The results would be more U.S. deaths,
more Black Hawks down, more confrontations with local populations, and an inevitable
mission creep in support of such raids that could easily escalate into new wars.
Yes, the conflict with al Qaeda, like all armed conflict, invites tragedy. But by narrowly
targeting our action against those who want to kill us and not the people they hide among, we
are choosing the course of action least likely to result in the loss of innocent life.
Our efforts must be measured against the history of putting American troops in distant lands
among hostile populations. In Vietnam, hundreds of thousands of civilians died in a war
where the boundaries of battle were blurred. In Iraq and Afghanistan, despite the
extraordinary courage and discipline of our troops, thousands of civilians have been killed. So
neither conventional military action nor waiting for attacks to occur offers moral safe harbor,
and neither does a sole reliance on law enforcement in territories that have no functioning
police or security services -- and indeed, have no functioning law. Now, this is not to say that the risks are not real. Any U.S. military action in foreign lands
risks creating more enemies and impacts public opinion overseas. Moreover, our laws
constrain the power of the President even during wartime, and I have taken an oath to defend
the Constitution of the United States. The very precision of drone strikes and the necessary
secrecy often involved in such actions can end up shielding our government from the public
scrutiny that a troop deployment invites. It can also lead a President and his team to view
drone strikes as a cure-all for terrorism.
And for this reason, I’ve insisted on strong oversight of all lethal action. After I took office,
my administration began briefing all strikes outside of Iraq and Afghanistan to the appropriate
committees of Congress. Let me repeat that: Not only did Congress authorize the use of
force, it is briefed on every strike that America takes. Every strike. That includes the one
instance when we targeted an American citizen -- Anwar Awlaki, the chief of external
operations for AQAP.
This week, I authorized the declassification of this action, and the deaths of three other
Americans in drone strikes, to facilitate transparency and debate on this issue and to dismiss
some of the more outlandish claims that have been made. For the record, I do not believe it
would be constitutional for the government to target and kill any U.S. citizen -- with a drone,
or with a shotgun -- without due process, nor should any President deploy armed drones over
U.S. soil.But when a U.S. citizen goes abroad to wage war against America and is actively plotting to
kill U.S. citizens, and when neither the United States, nor our partners are in a position to
capture him before he carries out a plot, his citizenship should no more serve as a shield than
a sniper shooting down on an innocent crowd should be protected from a SWAT team.
That’s who Anwar Awlaki was -- he was continuously trying to kill people. He helped oversee
the 2010 plot to detonate explosive devices on two U.S.-bound cargo planes. He was involved
in planning to blow up an airliner in 2009. When Farouk Abdulmutallab -- the Christmas Day
bomber -- went to Yemen in 2009, Awlaki hosted him, approved his suicide operation, helped
him tape a martyrdom video to be shown after the attack, and his last instructions were to
blow up the airplane when it was over American soil. I would have detained and prosecuted
Awlaki if we captured him before he carried out a plot, but we couldn’t. And as President, I
would have been derelict in my duty had I not authorized the strike that took him out.
Of course, the targeting of any American raises constitutional issues that are not present in
other strikes -- which is why my administration submitted information about Awlaki to the
Department of Justice months before Awlaki was killed, and briefed the Congress before this
strike as well. But the high threshold that we’ve set for taking lethal action applies to all
potential terrorist targets, regardless of whether or not they are American citizens. This
threshold respects the inherent dignity of every human life. Alongside the decision to put our men and women in uniform in harm’s way, the decision to
use force against individuals or groups -- even against a sworn enemy of the United States --
is the hardest thing I do as President. But these decisions must be made, given my
responsibility to protect the American people.
Going forward, I’ve asked my administration to review proposals to extend oversight of lethal
actions outside of warzones that go beyond our reporting to Congress. Each option has
virtues in theory, but poses difficulties in practice. For example, the establishment of a
special court to evaluate and authorize lethal action has the benefit of bringing a third branch
of government into the process, but raises serious constitutional issues about presidential and
judicial authority. Another idea that’s been suggested -- the establishment of an independent
oversight board in the executive branch -- avoids those problems, but may introduce a layer
of bureaucracy into national security decision-making, without inspiring additional public
confidence in the process. But despite these challenges, I look forward to actively engaging
Congress to explore these and other options for increased oversight.
I believe, however, that the use of force must be seen as part of a larger discussion we need
to have about a comprehensive counterterrorism strategy -- because for all the focus on the
use of force, force alone cannot make us safe. We cannot use force everywhere that a radical
ideology takes root; and in the absence of a strategy that reduces the wellspring of
extremism, a perpetual war -- through drones or Special Forces or troop deployments -- will
prove self-defeating, and alter our country in troubling ways.So the next element of our strategy involves addressing the underlying grievances and
conflicts that feed extremism -- from North Africa to South Asia. As we’ve learned this past
decade, this is a vast and complex undertaking. We must be humble in our expectation that
we can quickly resolve deep-rooted problems like poverty and sectarian hatred. Moreover, no
two countries are alike, and some will undergo chaotic change before things get better. But
our security and our values demand that we make the effort.
This means patiently supporting transitions to democracy in places like Egypt and Tunisia and
Libya -- because the peaceful realization of individual aspirations will serve as a rebuke to
violent extremists. We must strengthen the opposition in Syria, while isolating extremist
elements -- because the end of a tyrant must not give way to the tyranny of terrorism. We
are actively working to promote peace between Israelis and Palestinians -- because it is right
and because such a peace could help reshape attitudes in the region. And we must help
countries modernize economies, upgrade education, and encourage entrepreneurship --
because American leadership has always been elevated by our ability to connect with people’s
hopes, and not simply their fears.
And success on all these fronts requires sustained engagement, but it will also require
resources. I know that foreign aid is one of the least popular expenditures that there is. That’s true for Democrats and Republicans -- I’ve seen the polling -- even though it amounts
to less than one percent of the federal budget. In fact, a lot of folks think it’s 25 percent, if
you ask people on the streets. Less than one percent -- still wildly unpopular. But foreign
assistance cannot be viewed as charity. It is fundamental to our national security. And it’s
fundamental to any sensible long-term strategy to battle extremism.
Moreover, foreign assistance is a tiny fraction of what we spend fighting wars that our
assistance might ultimately prevent. For what we spent in a month in Iraq at the height of the
war, we could be training security forces in Libya, maintaining peace agreements between
Israel and its neighbors, feeding the hungry in Yemen, building schools in Pakistan, and
creating reservoirs of goodwill that marginalize extremists. That has to be part of our
strategy.
Moreover, America cannot carry out this work if we don’t have diplomats serving in some very
dangerous places. Over the past decade, we have strengthened security at our embassies,
and I am implementing every recommendation of the Accountability Review Board, which
found unacceptable failures in Benghazi. I’ve called on Congress to fully fund these efforts to
bolster security and harden facilities, improve intelligence, and facilitate a quicker response
time from our military if a crisis emerges.
But even after we take these steps, some irreducible risks to our diplomats will remain. This
is the price of being the world’s most powerful nation, particularly as a wave of change
washes over the Arab World. And in balancing the trade4offs between security and active
diplomacy, I firmly believe that any retreat from challenging regions will only increase the
dangers that we face in the long run. And that's why we should be grateful to those diplomats
who are willing to serve.
Targeted action against terrorists, effective partnerships, diplomatic engagement and
assistance -- through such a comprehensive strategy we can significantly reduce the chances
of large-scale attacks on the homeland and mitigate threats to Americans overseas. But as
we guard against dangers from abroad, we cannot neglect the daunting challenge of terrorism
from within our borders.As I said earlier, this threat is not new. But technology and the Internet increase its
frequency and in some cases its lethality. Today, a person can consume hateful propaganda,
commit themselves to a violent agenda, and learn how to kill without leaving their home. To
address this threat, two years ago my administration did a comprehensive review and
engaged with law enforcement.
And the best way to prevent violent extremism inspired by violent jihadists is to work with the
Muslim American community -- which has consistently rejected terrorism -- to identify signs
of radicalization and partner with law enforcement when an individual is drifting towards
violence. And these partnerships can only work when we recognize that Muslims are a
fundamental part of the American family. In fact, the success of American Muslims and our determination to guard against any
encroachments on their civil liberties is the ultimate rebuke to those who say that we’re at war
with Islam.
Thwarting homegrown plots presents particular challenges in part because of our proud
commitment to civil liberties for all who call America home. That’s why, in the years to come,
we will have to keep working hard to strike the appropriate balance between our need for
security and preserving those freedoms that make us who we are. That means reviewing the
authorities of law enforcement, so we can intercept new types of communication, but also
build in privacy protections to prevent abuse.
That means that -- even after Boston -- we do not deport someone or throw somebody in
prison in the absence of evidence. That means putting careful constraints on the tools the
government uses to protect sensitive information, such as the state secrets doctrine. And
that means finally having a strong Privacy and Civil Liberties Board to review those issues
where our counterterrorism efforts and our values may come into tension.
The Justice Department’s investigation of national security leaks offers a recent example of
the challenges involved in striking the right balance between our security and our open
society. As Commander-in-Chief, I believe we must keep information secret that protects our
operations and our people in the field. To do so, we must enforce consequences for those
who break the law and breach their commitment to protect classified information. But a free
press is also essential for our democracy. That’s who we are. And I’m troubled by the
possibility that leak investigations may chill the investigative journalism that holds
government accountable.Journalists should not be at legal risk for doing their jobs. Our focus must be on those who
break the law. And that’s why I’ve called on Congress to pass a media shield law to guard
against government overreach. And I’ve raised these issues with the Attorney General, who
shares my concerns. So he has agreed to review existing Department of Justice guidelines
governing investigations that involve reporters, and he’ll convene a group of media
organizations to hear their concerns as part of that review. And I’ve directed the Attorney
General to report back to me by July 12th.
Now, all these issues remind us that the choices we make about war can impact -- in
sometimes unintended ways -- the openness and freedom on which our way of life depends.
And that is why I intend to engage Congress about the existing Authorization to Use Military
Force, or AUMF, to determine how we can continue to fight terrorism without keeping America
on a perpetual wartime footing.
The AUMF is now nearly 12 years old. The Afghan war is coming to an end. Core al Qaeda is
a shell of its former self. Groups like AQAP must be dealt with, but in the years to come, not
every collection of thugs that labels themselves al Qaeda will pose a credible threat to the
United States. Unless we discipline our thinking, our definitions, our actions, we may be drawn into more
wars we don’t need to fight, or continue to grant Presidents unbound powers more suited for
traditional armed conflicts between nation states.
So I look forward to engaging Congress and the American people in efforts to refine, and
ultimately repeal, the AUMF’s mandate. And I will not sign laws designed to expand this
mandate further. Our systematic effort to dismantle terrorist organizations must continue.
But this war, like all wars, must end. That’s what history advises. That’s what our democracy
demands.
And that brings me to my final topic: the detention of terrorist suspects. I’m going to repeat
one more time: As a matter of policy, the preference of the United States is to capture
terrorist suspects. When we do detain a suspect, we interrogate them. And if the suspect can
be prosecuted, we decide whether to try him in a civilian court or a military commission.
During the past decade, the vast majority of those detained by our military were captured on
the battlefield. In Iraq, we turned over thousands of prisoners as we ended the war. In
Afghanistan, we have transitioned detention facilities to the Afghans, as part of the process of
restoring Afghan sovereignty. So we bring law of war detention to an end, and we are
committed to prosecuting terrorists wherever we can.
The glaring exception to this time-tested approach is the detention center at Guantanamo
Bay. The original premise for opening GTMO -- that detainees would not be able to challenge
their detention -- was found unconstitutional five years ago. In the meantime, GTMO has
become a symbol around the world for an America that flouts the rule of law. Our allies won’t
cooperate with us if they think a terrorist will end up at GTMO.During a time of budget cuts, we spend $150 million each year to imprison 166 people --
almost $1 million per prisoner. And the Department of Defense estimates that we must spend
another $200 million to keep GTMO open at a time when we’re cutting investments in
education and research here at home, and when the Pentagon is struggling with sequester
and budget cuts.
As President, I have tried to close GTMO. I transferred 67 detainees to other countries before
Congress imposed restrictions to effectively prevent us from either transferring detainees to
other countries or imprisoning them here in the United States.
These restrictions make no sense. After all, under President Bush, some 530 detainees were
transferred from GTMO with Congress’s support. When I ran for President the first time, John
McCain supported closing GTMO -- this was a bipartisan issue. No person has ever escaped
one of our super-max or military prisons here in the United States -- ever. Our courts have
convicted hundreds of people for terrorism or terrorism-related offenses, including some folks
who are more dangerous than most GTMO detainees. They're in our prisons. And given my administration’s relentless pursuit of al Qaeda’s leadership, there is no
justification beyond politics for Congress to prevent us from closing a facility that should have
never have been opened. So -- let me finish, ma'am. So today, once again --I'm about to address it, ma'am, but you've got to let me speak. I'm
about to address it. Let me address it: Why don’t you let me address it, ma'amWhy don’t you sit down and I will tell you exactly what I'm going to do. Thank you, ma'am. Thank you. Ma'am, thank you. You should let me
finish my sentence. Today, I once again call on Congress to lift the restrictions on detainee
transfers from GTMO.
I have asked the Department of Defense to designate a site in the United States where we can
hold military commissions. I’m appointing a new senior envoy at the State Department and
Defense Department whose sole responsibility will be to achieve the transfer of detainees to
third countries.
I am lifting the moratorium on detainee transfers to Yemen so we can review them on a caseby-case
basis. To the greatest extent possible, we will transfer detainees who have been
cleared to go to other countries.  Where appropriate, we will bring terrorists to justice in our courts and
our military justice system. And we will insist that judicial review be available for every
detainee.Now, ma'am, let me finish. Let me finish, ma'am. Part of free speech is
you being able to speak, but also, you listening and me being able to speak.
Now, even after we take these steps one issue will remain -- just how to deal with those
GTMO detainees who we know have participated in dangerous plots or attacks but who cannot
be prosecuted, for example, because the evidence against them has been compromised or is
inadmissible in a court of law. But once we commit to a process of closing GTMO, I am
confident that this legacy problem can be resolved, consistent with our commitment to the
rule of law.
I know the politics are hard. But history will cast a harsh judgment on this aspect of our fight
against terrorism and those of us who fail to end it. Imagine a future -- 10 years from now or
20 years from now -- when the United States of America is still holding people who have been
charged with no crime on a piece of land that is not part of our country. Look at the current
situation, where we are force-feeding detainees who are being held on a hunger strike. I'm
willing to cut the young lady who interrupted me some slack because it's worth being
passionate about. Is this who we are? Is that something our Founders foresaw? Is that the
America we want to leave our children? Our sense of justice is stronger than that.
We have prosecuted scores of terrorists in our courts. That includes Umar Farouk
Abdulmutallab, who tried to blow up an airplane over Detroit; and Faisal Shahzad, who put a
car bomb in Times Square. It's in a court of law that we will try Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, who is
accused of bombing the Boston Marathon. Richard Reid, the shoe bomber, is, as we speak,
serving a life sentence in a maximum security prison here in the United States. In sentencing
Reid, Judge William Young told him, “The way we treat you…is the measure of our own
liberties.We’re addressing that, ma’am I think that -- and I’m going off script, as you might expect here. The
voice of that woman is worth paying attention to. Obviously, I do not agree with much of
what she said, and obviously she wasn’t listening to me in much of what I said. But these are
tough issues, and the suggestion that we can gloss over them is wrong.
When that judge sentenced Mr. Reid, the shoe bomber, he went on to point to the American
flag that flew in the courtroom. “That flag,” he said, “will fly there long after this is all
forgotten. That flag still stands for freedom.”
So, America, we’ve faced down dangers far greater than al Qaeda. By staying true to the
values of our founding, and by using our constitutional compass, we have overcome slavery
and Civil War and fascism and communism. In just these last few years as President, I’ve
watched the American people bounce back from painful recession, mass shootings, natural
disasters like the recent tornados that devastated Oklahoma. These events were
heartbreaking; they shook our communities to the core. But because of the resilience of the
American people, these events could not come close to breaking us.
I think of Lauren Manning, the 9/11 survivor who had severe burns over 80 percent of her
body, who said, “That’s my reality. I put a Band-Aid on it, literally, and I move on.”
I think of the New Yorkers who filled Times Square the day after an attempted car bomb as if
nothing had happened.
I think of the proud Pakistani parents who, after their daughter was invited to the White
House, wrote to us, “We have raised an American Muslim daughter to dream big and never
give up because it does pay off.”I think of all the wounded warriors rebuilding their lives, and helping other vets to find jobs.
I think of the runner planning to do the 2014 Boston Marathon, who said, “Next year, you’re
going to have more people than ever. Determination is not something to be messed with.”
That’s who the American people are -- determined, and not to be messed with. And now we
need a strategy and a politics that reflects this resilient spirit.
Our victory against terrorism won’t be measured in a surrender ceremony at a battleship, or a
statue being pulled to the ground. Victory will be measured in parents taking their kids to
school; immigrants coming to our shores; fans taking in a ballgame; a veteran starting a
business; a bustling city street; a citizen shouting her concerns at a President.
The quiet determination; that strength of character and bond of fellowship; that refutation of
fear -- that is both our sword and our shield. And long after the current messengers of hate have faded from the world’s memory, alongside
the brutal despots, and deranged madmen, and ruthless demagogues who litter history -- the
flag of the United States will still wave from small-town cemeteries to national monuments, to
distant outposts abroad. And that flag will still stand for freedom.
Thank you very, everybody. God bless you. May God bless the United States of America.