Hello, Chicago. 
If there is anyone out there who still doubts that America is a place where all things are 
possible; who still wonders if the dream of our founders is alive in our time; who still
questions the power of our democracy, tonight is your answer.
It's the answer told by lines that stretched around schools and churches in numbers this 
nation has never seen; by people who waited three hours and four hours, many for the very 
first time in their lives, because they believed that this time must be different; that their 
voices could be that difference. 
It's the answer spoken by young and old, rich and poor, Democrat and Republican, black, 
white, Hispanic, Asian, Native American, gay, straight, disabled and not disabled ­­ Americans 
who sent a message to the world that we have never been just a collection of individuals or a 
collection of Red States and Blue States: we are, and always will be, the United States of 
America!
It's the answer that led those who have been told for so long by so many to be cynical, and 
fearful, and doubtful about what we can achieve to put their hands on the arc of history and 
bend it once more toward the hope of a better day.
It's been a long time coming, but tonight, because of what we did on this day, in this election,  at this defining moment, change has come to America.
A little bit earlier this evening, I received an extraordinarily gracious call from Senator McCain.  Senator McCain fought long and hard in this campaign, and he's fought even longer and 
harder for the country that he loves. He has endured sacrifices for America that most of us 
cannot begin to imagine. We are better off for the service rendered by this brave and selfless 
leader. I congratulate him; I congratulate Governor Palin for all that they've achieved, and I
look forward to working with them to renew this nation's promise in the months ahead. 
I want to thank my partner in this journey, a man who campaigned from his heart and spoke 
for the men and women he grew up with on the streets of Scranton and rode with on the train
home to Delaware, the Vice President­elect of the United States, Joe Biden. 
And I would not be standing here tonight without the unyielding support of my best friend for 
the last 16 years, the rock of our family, the love of my life, the nation's next First Lady: 
Michelle Obama. Sasha and Malia, I love you both more than you can imagine, and you have 
earned the new puppy that's coming with us to the White House. And while she's no longer 
with us, I know my grandmother's watching, along with the family that made me who I am. I
miss them tonight, and I know that my debt to them is beyond measure. To my sister Maya,
my sister Alma, all my other brothers and sisters ­­ thank you so much for the support that
you've given me. I am grateful to them. 
And to my campaign manager, David Plouffe ­­ the unsung hero of this campaign, who built
the best political campaign, I think, in the history of the United States of America. To my chief 
strategist David Axelrod ­­ who's been a partner with me every step of the way. To the best
campaign team ever assembled in the history of politics ­­ you made this happen, and I am 
forever grateful for what you've sacrificed to get it done.
But above all, I will never forget who this victory truly belongs to. It belongs to you. It
belongs to you. I was never the likeliest candidate for this office. We didn't start with much
money or many endorsements. Our campaign was not hatched in the halls of Washington. It
began in the backyards of Des Moines and the living rooms of Concord and the front porches 
of Charleston. It was built by working men and women who dug into what little savings they 
had to give 5 dollars and 10 dollars and 20 dollars to the cause. It grew strength from the 
young people who rejected the myth of their generation's apathy, who left their homes and 
their families for jobs that offered little pay and less sleep. It drew strength from the not­so­  young people who braved the bitter cold and scorching heat to knock on doors of perfect
strangers, and from the millions of Americans who volunteered and organized and proved that
more than two centuries later a government of the people, by the people, and for the people 
has not perished from the Earth. This is your victory. 
And I know you didn't do this just to win an election. And I know you didn't do it for me. You
did it because you understand the enormity of the task that lies ahead. For even as we 
celebrate tonight, we know the challenges that tomorrow will bring are the greatest of our 
lifetime: two wars, a planet in peril, the worst financial crisis in a century. Even as we stand 
here tonight, we know there are brave Americans waking up in the deserts of Iraq and the 
mountains of Afghanistan to risk their lives for us. There are mothers and fathers who will lie 
awake after the children fall asleep and wonder how they'll make the mortgage or pay their
doctors' bills or save enough for their child's college education. There's new energy to
harness, new jobs to be created, new schools to build, and threats to meet, alliances to repair. 
The road ahead will be long. Our climb will be steep. We may not get there in one year or 
even in one term. But, America, I have never been more hopeful than I am tonight that we 
will get there. I promise you, we as a people will get there. 
There will be setbacks and false starts. There are many who won't agree with every decision
or policy I make as President. And we know the government can't solve every problem. But I
will always be honest with you about the challenges we face. I will listen to you, especially 
when we disagree. And, above all, I will ask you to join in the work of remaking this nation,  the only way it's been done in America for 221 years ­­ block by block, brick by brick, 
calloused hand by calloused hand. What began 21 months ago in the depths of winter cannot
end on this autumn night. 
This victory alone is not the change we seek. It is only the chance for us to make that change.
And that cannot happen if we go back to the way things were. It can't happen without you,  without a new spirit of service, a new spirit of sacrifice. So let us summon a new spirit of 
patriotism, of responsibility, where each of us resolves to pitch in and work harder and look 
after not only ourselves but each other. Let us remember that, if this financial crisis taught us 
anything, it's that we cannot have a thriving Wall Street while Main Street suffers. In this 
country, we rise or fall as one nation, as one people. Let's resist the temptation to fall back on
the same partisanship and pettiness and immaturity that has poisoned our politics for so long.
Let's remember that it was a man from this state who first carried the banner of the 
Republican Party to the White House, a Party founded on the values of self­reliance and 
individual liberty and national unity. Those are values that we all share. And while the 
Democratic Party has won a great victory tonight, we do so with a measure of humility and 
determination to heal the divides that have held back our progress. As Lincoln said to a nation
far more divided than ours: "We are not enemies but friends...." "Though passion may have 
strained, it must not break our bonds of affection."¹ 
And to those Americans who whose support I have yet to earn, I may not have won your vote 
tonight, but I hear your voices. I need your help. And I will be your President, too. 
And to all those watching tonight from beyond our shores, from parliaments and palaces, to
those who are huddled around radios in the forgotten corners of the world, our stories are 
singular, but our destiny is shared, and a new dawn of American leadership is at hand.
To those who would tear the world down: We will defeat you. To those who seek peace and 
security: We support you. And to all those who have wondered if America's beacon still burns 
as bright: Tonight we've proved once more that the true strength of our nation comes not
from the might of our arms or the scale of our wealth, but from the enduring power of our 
ideals: democracy, liberty, opportunity, and unyielding hope.
That's the true genius of America: that America can change. Our union can be perfected. What 
we've already achieved gives us hope for what we can and must achieve tomorrow. 
This election had many firsts and many stories that will be told for generations. But one that's 
on my mind tonight's about a woman who cast her ballot in Atlanta. She's a lot like the 
millions of others who stood in line to make their voice heard in this election except for one 
thing: Ann Nixon Cooper is 106 years old.
She was born just a generation past slavery; a time when there were no
cars on the road or planes in the sky; when someone like her couldn't vote for two reasons: 
because she was a woman and because of the color of her skin. 
And tonight, I think about all that she's seen throughout her century in America ­­ the 
heartache and the hope; the struggle and the progress; the times we were told that we can't,  and the people who pressed on with that American creed: Yes we can. 
At a time when women's voices were silenced and their hopes dismissed, she lived to see 
them stand up and speak out and reach for the ballot: Yes we can. 
When there was despair in the dust bowl and depression across the land, she saw a nation
conquer fear itself with a New Deal, new jobs, a new sense of common purpose: Yes we can. 
When the bombs fell on our harbor and tyranny threatened the world, she was there to
witness a generation rise to greatness and a democracy was saved: Yes we can. 
She was there for the buses in Montgomery, the hoses in Birmingham, a bridge in Selma, and 
a preacher from Atlanta who told a people that "we shall overcome": Yes we can. 
A man touched down on the moon, a wall came down in Berlin, a world was connected by our 
own science and imagination. 
And this year, in this election, she touched her finger to a screen, and cast her vote, because 
after 106 years in America, through the best of times and the darkest of hours, she knows 
how America can change: Yes we can. 
America, we have come so far. We have seen so much. But there is so much more to do. So
tonight, let us ask ourselves ­­ if our children should live to see the next century; if my 
daughters should be so lucky to live as long as Ann Nixon Cooper, what change will they see? 
What progress will we have made?
This is our chance to answer that call. This is our moment. This is our time, to put our people 
back to work and open doors of opportunity for our kids; to restore prosperity and promote 
the cause of peace; to reclaim the American dream and reaffirm that fundamental truth, that,  out of many, we are one;² that while we breathe, we hope. And where we are met with
cynicism and doubt and those who tell us that we can't, we will respond with that timeless 
creed that sums up the spirit of a people: Yes, we can. 
Thank you. 
God bless you. 
And may God bless the United States of America.
This morning we woke up to more sobering news about the state of our economy. The 
240,000 jobs lost in October marks the 10th consecutive month that our economy has shed 
jobs. In total, we've lost nearly 1.2 million jobs this year, and more than 10 million Americans 
are now unemployed. Tens of millions of families are struggling to figure out how to pay the 
bills and stay in their homes. Their stories are an urgent reminder that we are facing the 
greatest economic challenge of our lifetime, and we're going to have to act swiftly to resolve 
it.
Now, the United States has only one government and one President at a time, and until
January 20th of next year, that government is the current Administration. I've spoken to
President Bush. I appreciate his commitment to ensuring that his economic policy team keeps 
us fully informed as developments unfold. And I'm also thankful for his invitation to the White 
House.
Immediately after I become President, I'm going to confront this economic crisis head­on by 
taking all necessary steps to ease the credit crisis, help hardworking families, and restore 
growth and prosperity. This morning I met with members of my Transition Economic Advisory 
Board, who are standing behind me, alongside my Vice President­elect, Joe Biden. They will
help to guide the work of my transition team, working with Rahm Emanuel, my Chief of Staff, 
in developing a strong set of policies to respond to this crisis. 
We discussed in the earlier meeting several of the most immediate challenges facing our 
economy and key priorities on which to focus on in the days and weeks ahead.
First of all, we need a rescue plan for the middle class that invests in immediate efforts to
create jobs and provide relief to families that are watching their paychecks shrink and their 
life savings disappear. A particularly urgent priority is a further extension of ­­ of 
unemployment insurance benefits for workers who cannot find work in the increasingly weak 
economy. A fiscal stimulus plan that will jump­start economic growth is long overdue. I've 
talked about it throughout this ­­ the last few months of the campaign. We should get it done.
Second, we have to address the spreading impact of the financial crisis on the other sectors of 
our economy ­­ small businesses that are struggling to meet their payrolls and finance their 
holiday inventories, and state and municipal governments facing devastating budget cuts and 
tax increases. We must also remember that the financial crisis is increasingly global and 
requires a global response. 
The news coming out of the auto industry this week reminds us of the hardship it faces ­­  hardship that goes far beyond individual auto companies to the countless suppliers, small
businesses, and communities throughout our nation who depend on a vibrant American auto
industry. The auto industry is the backbone of American manufacturing and a critical part of 
our attempt to reduce our dependence on foreign oil. 
I would like to see the Administration do everything it can to accelerate the retooling 
assistance that Congress has already enacted. In addition, I have made it a high priority for 
my transition team to work on additional policy options to help the auto industry adjust,  weather the financial crisis, and succeed in producing fuel­efficient cars here in the United 
States of America. And I was glad to be joined today by Governor Jennifer Granholm, who
obviously has great knowledge and great interest on this issue. I've asked my team to explore 
what we can do under current law and whether additional legislation will be needed for this 
purpose. 
Third, we will review the implementation of this Administration's financial program to ensure 
that the government's efforts are achieving their central goal of stabilizing financial markets 
while protecting taxpayers, helping homeowners, and not unduly rewarding the management
of financial firms that are receiving government assistance. It is absolutely critical that the 
Treasury work closely with the FDIC, HUD, and other government agencies to use the 
substantial authority that they already have to help families avoid foreclosure and stay in their 
homes. 
Finally, as we monitor and address these immediate economic challenges, we will be moving 
forward in laying out a set of policies that will grow our middle class and strengthen our 
economy in the long term. We cannot afford to wait on moving forward on the key priorities 
that I identified during the campaign, including clean energy, health care, education, and tax 
relief for middle­class families. My transition team will be working on each of these priorities in
the weeks ahead, and I intend to reconvene this advisory board to discuss the best ideas for 
responding to these immediate problems.
Let me close by saying this: I do not underestimate the enormity of the task that lies ahead.  We have taken some major action to date, and we will need further action during this 
transition and subsequent months. Some of the choices that we make are going to be difficult.  And I have said before and I will repeat again: It is not going to be quick and it is not going to
be easy for us to dig ourselves out of the hole that we are in, but America is a strong and 
resilient country. And I know we will succeed if we put aside partisanship and politics and 
work together as one nation. That's what I intend to do.
